SAGES U
SAGES.TV
iMAGES
Wiki
SAGESPAGES
MyCME
GetWellSooner



SAGES
Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons

Home
About
Meetings
Membership
Patient Info
Publications
Education
Services
Industry
Login
Laparoscopic Gallbladder Removal (Cholecystectomy) Patient Information from SAGES

Download PDF Version
Find a SAGES Surgeon
Gallbladder removal is one of the most commonly performed surgical procedures in the United States. Today, gallbladder surgery is performed laparoscopically. The medical name for this procedure is Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy.

What Is The Gallbladder?

The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ that rests beneath the right side of the liver.
Its main purpose is to collect and concentrate a digestive liquid (bile) produced by the liver. Bile is released from the gallbladder after eating, aiding digestion. Bile travels through narrow tubular channels (bile ducts) into the small intestine.
Removal of the gallbladder is not associated with any impairment of digestion in most people.
What Causes Gallbladder Problems?

Gallbladder problems are usually caused by the presence of gallstones: small hard masses consisting primarily of cholesterol and bile salts that form in the gallbladder or in the bile duct.
It is uncertain why some people form gallstones.
There is no known means to prevent gallstones.
These stones may block the flow of bile out of the gallbladder, causing it to swell and resulting in sharp abdominal pain, vomiting, indigestion and, occasionally, fever.
If the gallstone blocks the common bile duct, jaundice (a yellowing of the skin) can occur.
How Are These Problems Found and Treated?

Ultrasound is most commonly used to find gallstones.

In a few more complex cases, other X-ray tests may be used to evaluate gallbladder disease.
Gallstones do not go away on their own. Some can be temporarily managed with drugs or by making dietary adjustments, such as reducing fat intake. This treatment has a low, short-term success rate. Symptoms will eventually continue unless the gallbladder is removed.
Surgical removal of the gallbladder is the time honored and safest treatment of gallbladder disease.
What Are The Advantages of Performing Cholecystectomy Laparoscopically?

Rather than a five to seven inch incision, the operation requires only four small openings in the abdomen.
Patients usually have minimal post-operative pain.
Patients usually experience faster recovery than open gallbladder surgery patients.
Most patients go home within one day and enjoy a quicker return to normal activities.
Keep reading...

Page 1 of 3123»
 

 

Brought to you by:

SOCIETY OF AMERICAN GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOSCOPIC SURGEONS (SAGES)
11300 West Olympic Blvd., Suite 600
Los Angeles, CA 90064
Tel:
(310) 437-0544
Fax:
(310) 437-0585
E-Mail:
publications@sages.org
Purchase bulk reprints of SAGES Patient Information Brochures
Find a SAGES Member in your area
This brochure is intended to provide a general overview of a surgery. It is not intended to serve as a substitute for professional medical care or a discussion between you and your surgeon about the need for a surgery. Specific recommendations may vary among health care professionals. If you have a question about your need for a surgery, your alternatives, billing or insurance coverage, or your surgeons training and experience, do not hesitate to ask your surgeon or his/her office staff about it. If you have questions about the operation or subsequent follow up, discuss them with your surgeon before or after the operation.
Get Well Sooner with Minimally Invasive Surgery



For more patient information from SAGES visit 
Get Well Sooner -- Patient Information for Minimally Invasive Surgery

Get Well Sooner is brought to you by the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES).

Share This:

facebooktwittergoogle_pluslinkedinmail
More Patient Information on Minimally Invasive Surgery

Patient Information (English)
Patient Information (French)
Patient Information (Persian)
Patient Information (Polish)
Patient Information (Spanish)
Patient Information (Vietnamese)
Newsletter Subscriptions

Name*

First
 
Last
Email*


Socialize!


Contact SAGES

Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons
11300 W. OIympic Blvd Suite 600
Los Angeles, CA 90064 USA
webmaster@sages.org
Tel: (310) 437-0544

Important Links

2015 CME Credits

Get Well Sooner: Patient Information

2016 Meeting Information

Return to top of page

Copyright © 2015 Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons · Log in · Legal

heart failure
heart transplant
assist support devices