: 22938079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]576. ASAIO J. 2012 Sep-Oct;58(5):481-93. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e3182639a18.The influence of device position on the flow within the Penn State 12 ccpediatric ventricular assist device.Schönberger M(1), Deutsch S, Manning KB.Author information: (1)Department of Bioengineering, The Pennsylvania State University, UniversityPark, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.Ventricular assist devices are a commonly used heart failure therapy for adultpatients as bridge-to-transplant or bridge-to-recovery tools. The application of adult ventricular assist devices in pediatric patients has led to increasedthrombotic events. Therefore, we have been developing a pediatric ventricularassist device (PVAD), the Penn State 12 cc PVAD. It is designed for patients witha body weight of 5-15 kg and has a stroke volume of 12 cc. Clot formation is the major concern. It is correlated to the coagulability of blood, the bloodcontacting materials and the fluid dynamics within the system. The intent is for the PVAD to be a long term therapy. Therefore, the system may be oriented indifferent positions according to the patient's behavior. This study evaluates forthe first time the impact of position on the flow patterns within the Penn State 12 cc PVAD, which may help to improve the PVAD design concerning chamber andports geometries. The fluid dynamics are visualized by particle imagevelocimetry. The evaluation is based on inlet jet behavior and calculated wallshear rates. Vertical and horizontal model orientations are compared, both with abeat rate of 75, outlet pressures of 90/60 mm Hg and a flow rate of 1.3 l/min.The results show a significant change of the inlet jet behavior and thedevelopment of a rotational flow pattern. Vertically, the inlet jet is strongalong the wall. It initiates a rotational flow pattern with a wandering axis ofrotation. In contrast, the horizontal model orientation results show a weakerinlet jet along the wall with a nearly constant center of rotation location,which can be correlated to a higher risk of thrombotic events. In addition, high speed videography illustrates differences in the diaphragm motion duringdiastole. Diaphragm opening trajectories measurements determine no significantimpact of the density of the blood analog fluids. Hence, the results correlate tohuman blood.PMCID: PMC3431512