: 21787468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]757. Heart Fail Rev. 2012 Nov;17(6):737-46. doi: 10.1007/s10741-011-9274-y.Ventricular resynchronization is the principle mechanism of benefit with cardiac resynchronization therapy.Gorcsan J 3rd(1), Yu CM, Sanderson JE.Author information: (1)University of Pittsburgh, Scaife 564, 200 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA15213-2582, USA. gorcsanj@upmc.eduAlthough there is little debate over the fact that cardiac resynchronizationtherapy (CRT) can benefit the majority of patients selected with routineindications, the precise mechanism for improvement may be consideredcontroversial. Among patients selected with New York Heart Association functionalclass III or IV symptoms, left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 35% andelectrocardiographic QRS widening of at least 120-130 ms, approximately 60-80% ofpatients improved depending on the definition of response used. Although areasonable assumption is that electrocardiographic QRS widening is a surrogatefor delays in regional ventricular mechanical activation, a large volume of data has demonstrated that there is a subset of patients with widened QRS complexeswho have no significant mechanical dyssynchrony. The reason for dissociation ofelectrical dispersion and mechanical dyssynchrony is unknown presently, but many studies have demonstrated the association of dyssynchrony with favorable outcome following CRT. Perhaps more importantly, several imaging studies (principally by echocardiography) have shown the lack of baseline mechanical dyssynchrony to beas a marker for a less favorable outcome after CRT. Recently, the lack ofdyssynchrony before CRT has been shown to be associated with a significantlylower long-term probability of freedom from death, heart transplantation, or leftventricular assist device placement. As further mechanistic evidence for therelationship of mechanical dyssynchrony and LV functional response to CRT, it hasbeen suggested that patients who failed to improve their tissue Doppler measures of dyssynchrony after CRT have a lower chance of reverse remodeling. This topichas been muddled by technical difficulties in measurement of mechanicaldyssynchrony by all imaging approaches, the confounding variable of scar inischemic disease, and the widely variable definitions of response used bydifferent investigators. However, the weight of evidence from apathophysiological basis to the recent long-term patient outcome data stronglysupport the notion that resynchronization is the principle mechanism of benefitfrom CRT.