: 20933244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]898. Eur Heart J. 2011 May;32(9):1148-60. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq353. Epub 2010 Oct7.Heart failure reversal by ventricular unloading in patients with chroniccardiomyopathy: criteria for weaning from ventricular assist devices.Dandel M(1), Weng Y, Siniawski H, Stepanenko A, Krabatsch T, Potapov E, Lehmkuhl HB, Knosalla C, Hetzer R.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin, Germany. dandel@dhzb.deComment in    Eur Heart J. 2011 May;32(9):1052-4.AIMS: Unloading-promoted reversal of heart failure (HF) allows long-termtransplant-free outcome after ventricular assist device (VAD) removal. However,because few patients with chronic cardiomyopathy (CCM) were weaned from VADs (themajority only recently), the reliability of criteria used for weaning decisionsto predict long-term post-weaning success is barely known. After 15 years ofweaning experience, we assessed this issue.METHODS AND RESULTS: In 47 patients with CCM as the underlying cause for HF, who were part of a total of 90 patients weaned from bridge-to-transplant-designedVADs since 1995, we analysed data on cardiac morphology and function collectedbefore VAD implantation, echocardiographic parameters recorded during 'off-pump' trials, duration of HF before implantation, and stability of recovery before and early after VAD removal. Post-weaning 5 year freedom from HF recurrence reached66%. Only five patients (10.6%) died due to HF recurrence or weaning-relatedcomplications. Pre-explantation off-pump left ventricular ejection fraction(LVEF) of ≥50 and ≥45% revealed predictive values for cardiac stability lasting≥5 years after VAD removal of 91.7 and 79.1%, respectively. With each unit ofLVEF reduction, the risk of HF recurrence became 1.5 times higher. The predictivevalue of LVEF ≥45% also became >90% if additional parameters likepre-explantation LV size and geometry, stability of unloading-induced cardiacimprovement before VAD removal, and HF duration before VAD implantation were alsoconsidered. Definite cut-off values for certain parameters (includingtissue-Doppler-derived LV wall motion velocity) allowed formulation of weaningcriteria with high predictability for post-weaning stability, also in patientswith incomplete cardiac recovery.CONCLUSIONS: Ventricular assist device removal in CCM patients is feasible andcan be successful even after incomplete cardiac recovery. Parameters ofpre-explantation cardiac function, LV size and geometry, their stability duringfinal off-pump trials, and HF duration allow detection of patients with thepotential to remain stable for >5 post-weaning years.PMCID: PMC3086897