: 15385006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1518. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2004 Jun;23(6):709-15.Role of mast cells and their mediators in failing myocardium under mechanicalventricular support.Akgul A(1), Skrabal CA, Thompson LO, Loebe M, Lafuente JA, Noon GP, Youker KA.Author information: (1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,Texas, USA.BACKGROUND: Mast cells have been implicated in tissue remodeling and fibroblaststimulation. We explored the effect of mechanical support by left ventricularassist device (LVAD) in failing myocardium and looked into grade and distributionof interstitial fibrosis, mast cell density, mast cell phenotypes and basicfibroblast growth factor (bFGF) expression pre- and post-LVAD.METHODS: Myocardial tissue was obtained from 20 patients with end-stagecardiomyopathy at the time of LVAD implantation and LVAD removal and from 7 donorhearts not used for transplantation. Tissue sections were stained for mast cells using tryptase as a marker and the myocardial fibrosis was measured. Doublestaining for tryptase and chymase was performed for detection of chymase-positivemast cells. Fluorescent microscopy showed the relationship of mast cells to bFGF,and bFGF expression was quantified by Western blot.RESULTS: There was a significant increase in mast cells in heart failure vsnormal myocardium. A secondary increase in mast cells occurred after long-term(>40 days) support compared with matched pre-LVAD samples (mean +/- SEM; 57.4 +/-8.6 cells/10 fields vs 45.1 +/- 7.6 SEM cells/10 fields, p < 0.01). The secondaryincrease in mast cells was associated specifically with an increase inchymase-negative mast cells (p < 0.01). These findings are statisticallysignificant with concurrent decreased expression of bFGF and decreased fibrosisin the same patient tissues (p < 0.01).CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that, under long-term support, there is a change inphenotypic expression in mast cells, which can alter fibroblast functions. Thedecreased myocardial bFGF levels might be the result of these phenotypicallyaltered mast cells.