: 12058992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1684. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2002 Jun;21(6):674-9.Giant cell myocarditis: clinical presentation, bridge to transplantation withmechanical circulatory support, and long-term outcome.Davies RA(1), Veinot JP, Smith S, Struthers C, Hendry P, Masters R.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Ottawa HeartInstitute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. radavies@ottawaheart.caBACKGROUND: The multicenter Giant Cell Myocarditis Registry recorded 64 casesfrom 36 centers before 1996. The median transplant-free survival of 30 patientswithout immunosuppression was 3 months. Of 34 patients who received hearttransplantations, 9 experienced recurrence of giant cell myocarditis in theirtransplanted hearts and 1 patient died.METHODS: We reviewed our experience in 340 heart transplantations since 1984.Unexpected giant cell myocarditis was found in the explanted hearts of 7 patients(6 men and 1 female, aged 18-65 years).RESULTS: The duration from the onset of symptoms to assist-device implant ortransplantation ranged from 11 days to 9 years, whereas the time interval fromreferral or deterioration ranged from 2 days to 4 months. Four patients required mechanical circulatory support before surgery (total artificial hearts in 2 andleft ventricular assist devices in 2), and 3 patients required inotropic drugs.Six patients are alive with no sign of recurrent giant cell myocarditis at 12 to 113 months after surgery. One patient died suddenly 75 months after surgery, and autopsy showed severe graft vascular disease with no recurrence of giant cellmyocarditis. Surveillance, right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy specimensshowed recurrent asymptomatic giant cell myocarditis in 3 patients at 5 to 13months after surgery, and found recurrence in 1 patient 30 months after surgery. This patient received augmented immunosuppression.CONCLUSIONS: Giant cell myocarditis often is not diagnosed beforetransplantation. It can present as dilated cardiomyopathy with latedeterioration, or it can present with rapid hemodynamic deterioration. In ourexperience, these patients can be bridged successfully to transplant withmechanical circulatory assist. Giant cell myocarditis may recur aftertransplantation but may respond to augmented immunosuppression.