: 11988957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1694. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2002 May;21(5):516-21.Long-term follow-up of Thoratec ventricular assist device bridge-to-recoverypatients successfully removed from support after recovery of ventricularfunction.Farrar DJ(1), Holman WR, McBride LR, Kormos RL, Icenogle TB, Hendry PJ, Moore CH,Loisance DY, El-Banayosy A, Frazier H.Author information: (1)California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco, California, USA.BACKGROUND: In certain forms of severe heart failure there is sufficientimprovement in cardiac function during ventricular assist device (VAD) support toallow removal of the device. However, it is critical to know whether there issustained recovery of the heart and long-term patient survival if VAD bridging torecovery is to be considered over the option of transplantation.METHODS: To determine long-term outcome of survivors of VAD bridge-to-recoveryprocedures, we retrospectively evaluated 22 patients with non-ischemic heartfailure successfully weaned from the Thoratec left ventricular assist device(LVAD) or biventricular assist device (BVAD) after recovery of ventricularfunction at 14 medical centers. All patients were in imminent risk of dying andwere selected for VAD support using standard bridge-to-transplant requirements.There were 12 females and 10 males with an average age of 32 (range, 12-49). The etiologies were 12 with myocarditis, 7 with cardiomyopathies (4 post-partum[PPCM], 1 viral [VCM], and 2 idiopathic [IDCM]), and 3 with a combination ofmyocarditis and cardiomyopathy. BVADs were used in 13 patients and isolated LVADsin 9 patients, for an average duration of 57 days (range, 11-190 days), beforereturn of ventricular function and successful weaning from the device. Post-VADsurvival was compared with 43 VAD bridge-to-transplant patients with the sameetiologies who underwent cardiac transplantation instead of device weaning.RESULTS: Nineteen of the 22 patients are currently alive. Three patients requiredheart transplantation, 1 within 1 day, 2 at 12 and 13 months post-weaning, and 2 died at 2.5 and 6 months. The remaining 17 patients are alive with their nativehearts after an average of 3.2 years (range, 1.2-10 years). The actuarialsurvival of native hearts (transplant-free survival) post-VAD support is 86% at 1year and 77% at 5 years, which was not significantly different (p = 0.94) fromthat of post-VAD transplanted patients, also at 86% and 77%, respectively.CONCLUSIONS: Long-term survival for bridge-to-recovery with VADs for acutecardiomyopathies and myocarditis is equivalent to that for cardiactransplantation. Recovery of the native heart, which can take weeks to months of VAD support, is the most desirable clinical outcome and should be activelysought, with transplantation used only after recovery of ventricular function hasbeen ruled out.