: 14585381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1588. Biomed Pharmacother. 2003 Oct;57 Suppl 1:122s-125s.Artificial myocardium with an artificial baroreflex system using nano technology.Yambe T(1), Shiraishi Y, Yoshizawa M, Tanaka A, Abe K, Sato F, Matsuki H, Esashi M, Haga Y, Maruyama S, Takagi T, Luo Y, Okamoto E, Kubo Y, Osaka M, Nanka S,Saijo Y, Mibiki Y, Yamaguchi T, Shibata M, Nitta S.Author information: (1)Department of Medical Engineering and Cardiology, Institute of Development,Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. yambe@idac.tohoku.ac.jpWhere is the place which should be helped in a patient with congestive heartfailure? The answer may be contraction of the heart. At Tohoku University,development research of "the artificial myocardium" has been conducted, using aball screw type electromagnetic motor. Furthermore, super-miniaturization isbeing attempted at present. Thus, a system with shape memory alloy is beingdeveloped. The cooling speed problem was solved by the application of the Peltierelement. A drive at a speed equal to that of a heartbeat was realized by theapplication of this system. At present, a ventricular assist device is used forpatients waiting for a heart transplant in Japan. An air driven type systemdisturbs a patient's QOL remarkably because it is connected to the drive device. With our concept, energy is provided by using the electromagnetic force fromoutside of the body by the use of transcutaneous energy transmission system.Magnetic shielding by amorphous fibers was used at Tohoku University to improvethe total efficiency. A natural heart can alter the cardiac output corresponding to the demand. Artificial internal organs must participate in the system of theliving body, too. Tohoku University has developed a resistance based artificialheart control algorithm, which simulated a baroreflex system to cope with everydemand. Nano level sensing equipment is now under development at TohokuUniversity. At present, development is being conducted aiming at an "intelligent artificial myocardium".