: 25452908  [PubMed]77. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015 Jan;34(1):122-31. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2014.09.017. Epub 2014 Sep 28.Rotary pump speed modulation for generating pulsatile flow and phasic leftventricular volume unloading in a bovine model of chronic ischemic heart failure.Soucy KG(1), Giridharan GA(2), Choi Y(2), Sobieski MA(3), Monreal G(3), ChengA(3), Schumer E(3), Slaughter MS(3), Koenig SC(4).Author information: (1)Departments of a?>Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery; Bioengineering,University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky. (2)Bioengineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky. (3)Departments of a?>Cardiovascular andThoracic Surgery. (4)Departments of a?>Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery;Bioengineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky. Electronicaddress: steven.koenig@louisville.edu.BACKGROUND: Rotary blood pumps operate at a constant speed (rpm) that diminishes vascular pulsatility and variation in ventricular end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes, which may contribute to adverse events, including aortic insufficiencyand gastrointestinal bleeding. In this study, pump speed modulation algorithmsfor generating pulsatility and variation in ventricular end-systolic andend-diastolic volumes were investigated in an ischemic heart failure (IHF) bovinemodel (n = 10) using a clinically implanted centrifugal-flow left ventricularassist device (LVAD).METHODS: Hemodynamic and hematologic measurements were recorded during IHFbaseline, constant pumps speeds, and asynchronous (19-60 cycles/min) andsynchronous (copulse and counterpulse) pump speed modulation profiles using lowrelative pulse speed (±25%) of 3,200 ± 800 rpm and high relative pulse speed(±38%) of 2,900 ± 1,100 rpm. End-organ perfusion, hemodynamics, and pumpparameters were measured to characterize pulsatility, myocardial workload, andLVAD performance for each speed modulation profile.RESULTS: Speed modulation profiles augmented aortic pulse pressure, surplushemodynamic energy, and end-organ perfusion (p < 0.01) compared with operation atconstant speed. Left ventricular external work and myocardial oxygen consumption were significantly reduced compared with IHF baseline (p < 0.01) but at theexpense of higher LVAD power consumption.CONCLUSIONS: Pump speed modulation increases pulsatility and improves cardiacfunction and end-organ perfusion, but the asynchronous mode provides thetechnologic advantage of sensorless control. Investigation of asynchronous pumpspeed modulation during long-term support is warranted to test the hypothesisthat operating an LVAD with speed modulation will minimize adverse events inpatients supported by an LVAD that may be associated with long-term operation at a constant pump speed.Copyright © 2015 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.