: 10972218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1799. Jpn J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000 Jul;48(7):440-6.Clinical effects of ventricular assist system in end-stage cardiac failure.Advantages of left ventricular blood drainage for recovery from cardiacdysfunction.Kyo S(1), Tanabe H, Asano H, Ohuchi H, Nogaki H, Ishikawa M, Yokote Y, KoyanagiT, Noda H, Omoto R.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Saitama Medical School, Japan.OBJECTIVES: Heart transplantation is extremely limited currently in Japan. As aconsequence ventricular assist system implantation is employed the patient falls into end-stage cardiogenic shock. This preliminary report describes our initialclinical experience with use of 2 kinds of ventricular assist system for 13Japanese patients.METHODS: 7 patients were supported by a left ventricular assist system with blooddrainage from the left atrium (LA drainage Group) using a Toyobo ventricularassist system, while another 6 patients were supported by a left ventricularassist system with blood drainage from the left ventricle (LV drainage Group)using the Toyobo ventricular assist system (1 patient) or TCI-LVAS (5 patients).RESULTS: The average duration of ventricular assist system support in the LVdrainage Group was 112 days including two on-going patients (now at 39 days and241 days) and in the LA drainage Group was 49 days. The average left ventricular ejection fraction at 3 weeks after ventricular assist system implantation wasimproved from 12.3 to 54% using the TCI-LVAS and from 14 to 33% using the Toyobo ventricular assist system with drainage from the left ventricle. However, thiswas decreased from 20 to 10% using the Toyobo ventricular assist system withdrainage from the left atrium. The ventricular assist system was explanted in 4patients (31%) with recovery of cardiac dysfunction and 3 were long survivors.The 2 on-going patients are awaiting heart transplantation. Thus the currentsurvival rate overall is 38%. The survival rate (67%) is excellent in the LVdrainage Group including 2 long survivors after explantation.CONCLUSION: Ventricular assist system support with drainage from the leftventricle seems to be more advantageous for cardiac functional recovery than fromthe left atrium for end-stage heart failure.