: 25566745  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]55. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015 Jan 5. pii: ezu516. [Epub ahead of print]Extracorporeal life support as a bridge to bridge: a strategy to optimizeventricular assist device results.Lebreton G(1), Pozzi M(2), Mastroianni C(3), Léger P(3), Pavie A(3), LeprinceP(3).Author information: (1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, University 'Pierre etMarie Curie', Paris, France guillaume.lebreton@psl.aphp.frguillaumelebreton@live.fr. (2)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Pitié-SalpêtrièreHospital, University 'Pierre et Marie Curie', Paris, France School inCardiovascular Science, Cardiovascular Surgery Unit, University of Verona MedicalSchool, Verona, Italy. (3)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Pitié-SalpêtrièreHospital, University 'Pierre et Marie Curie', Paris, France.OBJECTIVES: Extracorporeal life support (ECLS) devices provide temporarymechanical circulatory assistance and are usually implanted under emergencyconditions in critical patients. If weaning off ECLS is not possible, hearttransplantation or implantation of long-term mechanical circulatory support(LTMCS) is required. The purpose of our study was to evaluate thebridge-to-bridge (BTB) concept.METHODS: Between 1 January 2004 and 1 August 2010, 97 patients were assisted byLTMCS. The implantation was the first-line intervention in 48 patients (thebridge group), and was performed after a period of ECLS support in 49 others (theBTB group).RESULTS: The long-term survival rate was 51.6%, with a mean follow-up of 30.7months, and there were no differences for biological parameters between the twogroups. Patients in the BTB group whose condition was initially more severe,improved under ECLS support, and those in whom biological parameters did notrevert to normal died after LTMCS. Risk factors for mortality in the BTB groupwere total bilirubin and lactate before LTMCS, and alkaline phosphatase beforeECLS support.CONCLUSIONS: The BTB concept allows the implementation of LTMCS in severepatients, for whom it was not originally envisaged, with the same long-termsurvival as in first-line settings. ECLS in the evolution of patients ispredictive of survival after LTMCS.© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.