: 20817565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]918. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Dec;29(12):1337-41. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2010.07.001.End-of-life decision making and implementation in recipients of a destinationleft ventricular assist device.Brush S(1), Budge D, Alharethi R, McCormick AJ, MacPherson JE, Reid BB, LedfordID, Smith HK, Stoker S, Clayson SE, Doty JR, Caine WT, Drakos S, Kfoury AG.Author information: (1)Utah Artificial Heart Program, and Intermountain Medical Center andIntermountain Healthcare, Salt Lake City, Utah 84107, USA.BACKGROUND: The use of left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) as destinationtherapy (DT) is increasing and has proven beneficial in prolonging survival andimproving quality of life in select patients with end-stage heart failure.Nonetheless, end-of-life (EOL) issues are inevitable and how to approach themunderreported.METHODS: Our DT data registry was queried for eligible patients, defined as thoseindividuals who actively participated in EOL decision making. The process fromearly EOL discussion to palliation and death was reviewed. We recorded the causesleading to EOL discussion, time from EOL decision to withdrawal and fromwithdrawal to death, and location. Primary caregivers were surveyed to qualifytheir experience and identify themes relevant to this process.RESULTS: Between 1999 and 2009, 92 DT LVADs were implanted in 69 patients. Twentypatients qualified for inclusion (mean length of support: 833 days). A decreasein quality of life from new/worsening comorbidities usually prompted EOLdiscussion. Eleven patients died at home, 8 in the hospital and 1 in a nursinghome. Time from EOL decision to LVAD withdrawal ranged from <1 day to 2 weeks andfrom withdrawal until death was <20 minutes in all cases. Palliative care wasprovided to all patients. Ongoing assistance from the healthcare team facilitatedclosure and ensured comfort at EOL.CONCLUSIONS: With expanding indications and improved technology, more DT LVADswill be implanted and for longer durations, and more patients will face EOLissues. A multidisciplinary team approach with protocols involving DT patientsand their families in EOL decision making allows for continuity of care andensures dignity and comfort at EOL.Copyright © 2010 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.