: 21530317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]804. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011 Jul;30(7):834-7. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2011.03.012.Epub 2011 May 6.Less invasive off-pump implantation of axial flow pumps in chronic ischemic heartfailure: survival effects.Ghodsizad A(1), Kar BJ, Layolka P, Okur A, Gonzales J, Bara C, Ungerer MN, Karck M, Gregoric ID, Ruhparwar A.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.BACKGROUND: Off-pump implantation of left ventricular assist device (LVAD) axial or centrifugal flow pumps in patients with low ejection fraction (EF) is of majorclinical relevance. In addition, all pre-clinical, long-term implantationsperformed so far have been carried out in healthy animals, but this does notreflect the eventual clinical setting. In this study we established a newtechnique using a miniaturized axial flow pump in sheep with chronically ischemicmyocardium.METHODS: Sheep (n = 15) underwent intracoronary sphere injection to createchronic ischemic heart failure. Reduced EF was assessed using transesophagealechocardiography. All animals underwent implantation of a new miniaturized axial flow pump via an extraperitoneal, subcostal surgical approach.RESULTS: Our technique allows easy exposure of the diaphragmatic surface of theheart and the descending aorta. Ten animals (range 65 to 78 kg) underwentoff-pump implantation 30 (range 25 to 33) days after intracoronary sphereinjection. All animals had significantly reduced EF (25 ± 4.8%) and werereceiving high doses of inotropic agents to maintain cardiac function. Nineanimals survived the surgical procedure. The average 12-hour blood loss was 435ml. Cardiac index improved significantly in all animals. The procedure time wasnot extended by any adverse events (60 to 145 minutes).CONCLUSIONS: The extraperitoneal, subcostal surgical approach is less invasivethan a median sternotomy and allows centrifugal or axial to be implanted quickly and without cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). Avoiding CPB and an extensivemediastinal dissection can help to decrease significantly the number ofcomplications in patients with end-stage organ failure.Copyright © 2011 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.