: 20545660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]952. Artif Organs. 2010 Jul;34(7):600-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.2009.00970.x. Epub2010 Jun 10.Initial clinical experience with the HeartMate II ventricular assist system in a pediatric institution.Owens WR(1), Bryant R 3rd, Dreyer WJ, Price JF, Morales DL.Author information: (1)Division of Congenital Heart Surgery, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX77030-2399, USA. wrowens@texaschildrenshospital.orgIn many adult cardiac programs, intracorporeal mechanical circulatory support hasbecome a routine treatment for end-stage cardiac failure. For the pediatricpopulation, options are often limited by a small body habitus. Even when anadolescent's weight may suggest adequate space for device implant, mostintracorporeal adult devices remain too large for adolescents. The ThoratecHeartMate II (HM II) (approved by the FDA in April of 2008) is a small, noiselessdevice that is easily operated and monitored. By having an uncomplicatedoperating system and small percutaneous drive line, the HM II provides anopportunity for these patients to aggressively rehabilitate to become a bettertransplant candidate and also provides the potential to be discharged home. Thetwo youngest patients ever to utilize the HM II are also the first two cases ofusing the HM II at a freestanding pediatric hospital. A 12-year-old, 53 kg, girl with dilated cardiomyopathy was supported for 85 days before receiving her heart transplant. The second patient, a 13-year-old, 149 kg, Hispanic male sufferingfrom morbid obesity and dilated cardiomyopathy, was supported for 128 days. TheHM II allowed for rehabilitation and nutritional education, resulting in thispatient losing 50 kg before heart transplant. Despite both of these patients'size, their thoracic cavities were that of a preadolescent and thus techniqueswere developed to avoid morbidities like chest wall abrasion and bleeding.Because of differences between adult and pediatric patients and institutions,these cases provided unique challenges. However, as pediatric device therapy isnow maturing, pediatric programs such as Texas Children's Hospital have begun to develop strategies for mechanical support that factor in patient's size and need for long-term or temporary support, utilizing the growing number of devices(i.e., Jostra Rotoflow, Tandem Heart PTVA, Thoratec CentriMag, Berlin HeartEXCOR, etc.) that are now available to children.