: 24577371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]240. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2014 Nov;46(5):802-7. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezu040. Epub2014 Feb 26.Right heart failure and benefits of adjuvant tricuspid valve repair in patientsundergoing left ventricular assist device implantation.Fujita T(1), Kobayashi J(2), Hata H(2), Seguchi O(3), Murata Y(3), Yanase M(3),Nakatani T(3).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, National Cerebral and CardiovascularCentre, Osaka, Japan tomofujita@nifty.com tfujita@hsp.ncvc.go.jp. (2)Departmentof Cardiovascular Surgery, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Centre, Osaka,Japan. (3)Department of Transplantation, National Cerebral and CardiovascularCentre, Osaka, Japan.OBJECTIVES: Although right heart failure (RVF) is an important issue in themanagement of patients with left ventricular assist devices (LVADs), the benefitsof performing tricuspid valve repair in conjunction with LVAD implantation havenot been demonstrated.METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the records of 141 patients who receivedLVAD implantation as a bridge to transplant from May 1999 to January 2013. Weassessed short- and long-term right heart function in 69 of these patients whounderwent tricuspid valve repair because of moderate-to-severe tricuspidregurgitation (TR) or severe dilatation of the tricuspid annulus. RVF was definedas the need for a right ventricular assist device or >30 days of intravenousinotropic support. TR was graded from 0 to 4, while fibrosis in myocardial biopsysamples was graded pathologically from 0 to 3.RESULTS: The average duration of LVAD support was 595 days. Twenty-seven patientsdeveloped RVF and their survival rate was significantly worse than that ofpatients who did not develop RVF (65 vs 91% at 1 year). RVF was significantlyrelated to high preoperative ratio of central venous pressure (CVP) to pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, high total bilirubin, high fibrosis score and high TRgrade. In patients who underwent tricuspid valve repair, the TR grade wassignificantly reduced from 2.6 to 1.0, and this decrease was maintained for 2years. Although patients who underwent tricuspid valve repair had significantlyhigher TR grades, ratios of CVP to pulmonary capillary wedge pressure andfibrosis scores preoperatively, no survival impairment was seen.CONCLUSIONS: Tricuspid valve repair is a useful and durable adjuvant procedurefor restoring deteriorated right ventricular function in patients requiring LVAD implantation.© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.