: 11448811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1739. Artif Organs. 2001 May;25(5):406-10.Blood pumps: technologies and markets in transformation.Anderson DW(1).Author information: (1)MicroMed Technology, Inc., Houston, Texas 77054, USA.The heart failure industry or sector of blood pump technologies comprised ofscientists, medicine, and business has inadequate attention from the financialcommunity due to the perception of unmet market potential and regulatory hurdles.There are more than 20 mechanical circulatory support technologies currently insome stage of development. The application is defined initially for emergingtechnologies as bridge-to-transplant whereas more mature devices have focused on bridge-to-recovery and alternative-to-transplant. Regulatory hurdles andfinancing resources have dictated this initial application strategy. Whether atechnology has valves, bearings, is magnetically suspended, acts as a pressurecuff, and so on, the future will belong in large part to those technologies that are less expensive, have improved ergonomics, are simpler in surgicalapplication, and can demonstrate efficacy levels that are an improvement overtoday's approved devices. Today's devices have provided a valuable platform forthe emerging technologies. However, there has been little market expansion overthese past years, relative to the potential market. The cardiologist is thepatient's gatekeeper, and drugs appear to be the therapy of choice as options areconsidered. Technologies without a business model will have a difficult timeattracting much needed funding, the result being protracted development times or project termination. MicroMed has modified its ventricular assist device (VAD)focus, with a broader look at treating the heart failure patient. MicroMedrecently entered into an agreement with Chrysalis Biotechnology, Inc., Galveston,TX, covering a synthetic peptide technology (Chrysalin) that when injected intotissue has demonstrated an angiogenic effect without the concerns inherent inrecombinant angiogenic/growth factors. We believe a combination therapy of theDeBakey VAD-synthetic peptide could provide sufficient revascularization forbridge-to-recovery or as an alternative-to-transplant in certain patients.