: 25008779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]154. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Sep;33(9):937-42. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2014.04.017. Epub 2014 May 9.Efficacy and durability of central oversewing for treatment of aorticinsufficiency in patients with continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices.Schechter MA(1), Joseph JT(1), Krishnamoorthy A(2), Finet JE(2), Ganapathi AM(1),Lodge AJ(1), Milano CA(1), Patel CB(3).Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.(2)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NorthCarolina. (3)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,North Carolina. Electronic address: chetan.patel@dm.duke.edu.Erratum in    J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Nov;33(11):1202. Finet, J Emanuel [corrected toFinet, JE].BACKGROUND: Aortic insufficiency (AI) in patients supported with continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices (CF-LVAD) results in regurgitant volume returningfrom the aorta to the left ventricle, increased LVAD pump volume and reducedsystemic cardiac output. One common strategy to address AI during CF-LVAD supportis central oversewing of the aortic valve, which allows some opening between the valve leaflets laterally. However, the long-term durability of this technique hasnot been extensively described.METHODS: All patients who underwent central oversewing of the aortic valve duringCF-LVAD support between January 2006 and March 2013 were included in thisanalysis. Pre- and post-procedure intra-operative transesophageal echocardiograms(TEEs) were reviewed to determine the efficacy of the surgical technique, whereasall subsequent transthoracic echocardiograms (TTEs) were reviewed to assessdurability. AI severity was graded using the vena contracta (VC) width and theratio between the VC and left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) diameter.RESULTS: Nineteen patients with central aortic valve oversewing were identified. Median follow-up was 560 days (range 46 to 954 days). All but 1 patient had theiraortic insufficiency reduced to "none/trace" on post-operative TEE. There was no statistically significant increase in the VC width and VC/LVOT ratio between the first and last follow-up echocardiograms, and only 2 patients developed more thanmild aortic insufficiency after central oversewing. Central oversewing of theaortic valve did not adversely affect outcomes after LVAD implantation.CONCLUSION: Central oversewing of the aortic valve is an effective and durablemeans of addressing greater than mild AI in patients with CF-LVAD.Copyright © 2014 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.