: 23628111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]447. Transplant Proc. 2013 Apr;45(3):1017-9. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.02.071.Left ventricular assist device implantation in heart failure patients with a leftventricular thrombus.Engin C(1), Yagdi T, Balcioglu O, Erkul S, Baysal B, Oguz E, Ayik F, Ozturk P,Ozbaran M.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Ege University Medical Faculty Hospital,Izmir, Turkey. cagatayengin@yahoo.comBACKGROUND: In this report, we share our experience with left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation in cases with a left ventricular (LV) thrombus.METHOD: Over the 3 years, more than 100 end-stage heart failure cases have beentreated with LVAD implantation in our center, including 6 patients with a LVthrombus. Three were detected using preoperative transthoracic echocardiography. Fifty percent of the patients had dilated cardiomyopathy and the remaining cases had an ischemic etiology. Double inotropic support with dopamine and dobutaminewas used in all, with 3 drugs with the addition of adrenaline in 2 patients. In 4cases we implanted the HeartWare Ventricular Assist System (HeartWare, Inc.,Miramar, Fla, United States) and in the remaining 2 patients, the Berlin HeartEXCOR ventricular assist device (Berlin Heart AG, Berlin, Germany) forbiventricular support. In 1 patient the apical ventriculotomy was extended toremove an intertrabecular thrombosis and ventricular septal surface covered with a dacron patch to minimize the thrombogenic potential.RESULTS: Two patients died due to sepsis and multiorgan failure. None of thepatients experienced a neurological event, pump thrombosis, or pump malfunction. Two subjects underwent re-explorations due to hemorrhage. Two candidatesunderwent successfull transplantation without any evidence of thrombosis in theexplanted heart or device.CONCLUSION: We believe that patients with a LV thrombus and preserved rightventricular function are good candidates for implantation of a LVAD afterremoving the intracavitary thrombus.Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.