: 17234511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1329. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2007 Jan;26(1):1-8.Neurologic events with a totally implantable left ventricular assist device:European LionHeart Clinical Utility Baseline Study (CUBS).Pae WE(1), Connell JM, Boehmer JP, Korfer R, El-Banayosy A, Hetzer R, Vigano M,Pavie A; CUBS Study Group.Author information: (1)Heart and Vascular Institute, Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, PennsylvaniaState University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033-0850, USA.wpae@psu.eduBACKGROUND: Neurologic events such as thromboembolic and hemorrhagic strokes are common complications of mechanical circulatory support. We report the neurologic events observed in patients treated for end-stage heart failure with theimplantable, pulsatile LionHeart left ventricular assist device (LVAD). Thissub-study was part of the LionHeart European Clinical Utility Baseline Study(CUBS).METHODS: Twenty-three male patients were implanted with the LionHeart LVAD in anon-randomized, observational study. Neurologic events were classified into threecategories: (1) transient ischemic attacks (TIAs); (2) strokes, includingcerebrovascular accidents (CVAs) and intracranial bleeding (ICB); and (3)"other," including hypoperfusion, coma and brain death. Neurologic injuries were also categorized as transient/reversible or permanent/disabling.RESULTS: Thirteen of 23 patients (57%) had a total of 30 neurologic events. Eightpatients (35%) had 18 TIAs. Eight patients (35%) also had a stroke, either CVA (n= 5, 22%) or ICB (n = 3, 13%), and 5 of these patients (22%) also had 12 TIAs.Three patients (13%) had 4 "other" neurologic events. Ten patients (43%) hadtransient/reversible neurologic deficits and 10 (43%) had permanent/disablingevents. One patient (4%) had intracranial bleeding as a primary cause of death(anti-coagulation-related hemorrhage). The combined incidence of neurologicevents was 1.37 events/patient-year. The incidences of transient and permanentevents were 0.91 and 0.46 event/patient-year, respectively.CONCLUSIONS: Neurologic events caused morbidity in the CUBS trial, withinfrequent mortality. These results are similar to previous experiences withdestination therapy and underscore the need for improvements in LVAD design,patient selection and patient management to reduce the incidence of neurologicevents.