: 21958789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]728. Artif Organs. 2012 Mar;36(3):256-65. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.2011.01344.x. Epub 2011 Sep 29.Comparison of preload-sensitive pressure and flow controller strategies for adual device biventricular support system.Gaddum NR(1), Timms DL, Stevens M, Mason D, Lovell N, Fraser JF.Author information: (1)Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, University of New South Wales,Sydney, NSW, Australia. nickgaddum@gmail.comThe use of rotary left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) has extended todestination and recovery therapy for end-stage heart failure. Incidence of right ventricular failure while on LVAD support requires a second device be implantedto support the failing right ventricle. Without a commercially availableimplantable rotary right ventricular assist device, rotary LVADs are cannulatedinto the right heart and operation modified to provide suitable support for thepulmonary system. While this approach can alleviate the demand for transplantthrough long-term biventricular support, it uncovers a new challenge with respectto controller strategies for these dual device support systems. This studycompares the preload sensitivity of rotary, dual device biventricular assistance controllers in light of their ability to adjust the flow rate according tophysiological demand. A Frank-Starling-like flow controller which requires bothinlet pressure and flow sensors is compared to pressure controllers whichmaintain atrial or inlet cannula pressures through the use of a single pressuresensor. It was found that cannula selection and the location of a pressurecontroller's single pressure sensor can be tailored to adjust the preloadsensitivity. When located within the atria, this sensitivity is effectivelyinfinite. Moving the sensor to the base of a 450-mm cannula, however, decreasedthe sensitivity to 0.22 (L/min)/mm Hg. This indicates the potential for simpleand reliable VAD controllers with increased preload sensitivity without the need for complex controllers requiring an array of hemodynamic sensors.© 2011, Copyright the Authors. Artificial Organs © 2011, International Center forArtificial Organs and Transplantation and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.