: 12457310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1661. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2002 Dec;124(6):1149-56.Heterotopic transplantation as a model to study functional recovery of unloadedfailing hearts.Tevaearai HT(1), Walton GB, Eckhart AD, Keys JR, Koch WJ.Author information: (1)Departments of Surgery and Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke UniversityMedical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Koch0002@mc.duke.eduOBJECTIVES: Recent studies have demonstrated cardiac improvement in patientssupported with a ventricular assist device, suggesting that reverse remodelingand myocardial recovery are possible. We developed an animal model of cardiacunloading by adapting a heterotopic transplantation technique and used it toexamine the pattern of functional recovery in the left ventricle of the failingheart.METHODS: Heart failure was induced in adult New Zealand rabbits by coronaryartery ligation with subsequent myocardial infarction. Animals undergoing shamoperation served as a control group. After 4 weeks or 3 months, failing heartswere transplanted into the necks of recipient rabbits. A left ventricular latexballoon connected to subcutaneous tubing allowed repeated physiologic analysis ondays 1 and after transplantation and then every 5 days until day 30.RESULTS: Contractility (left ventricular dP/dt(max)) and relaxation (leftventricular dP/dt(min)) were significantly lower in transplanted postinfarctionhearts as compared to control hearts immediately after transplantation. Both leftventricular dP/dt(max) and left ventricular dP/dt(min) responses to increasedpreload and to beta-adrenergic stimulation progressively improved to asignificantly higher level after 30 days of left ventricular unloading for thehearts that were transplanted 4 weeks after myocardial infarction. However, this functional improvement was not detected in failing hearts transplanted 3 monthsafter infarction.CONCLUSIONS: This model of cardiac unloading appears at least partially to mimic conditions of ventricular assist devices. If performed early in the developmentof heart failure, it permits improvement of contractile dysfunction andrestoration of cardiac responsiveness to mechanical and beta-adrenergicstimulation. Therefore this model may constitute a novel alternative in the studyof reverse remodeling in unloaded failing hearts.