: 17461996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1305. Can J Cardiol. 2007 Apr;23(5):363-7.Management of acute severe perioperative failure of cardiac allografts: asingle-centre experience with a review of the literature.Ibrahim M(1), Hendry P, Masters R, Rubens F, Lam BK, Ruel M, Davies R, Haddad H, Veinot JP, Mesana T.Author information: (1)Section of Cardiac Surgery, St. Boniface General Hospital, Winnipeg, Manitoba,Canada. mibrahim@sbgh.mb.caBACKGROUND: Early graft failure is associated with high mortality and is the maincause of death within the first 30 days after transplantation. The purpose of thepresent study was to examine the investigators' experience of severeperioperative acute graft failure and to review the literature.METHODS: Nine of 385 cardiac transplants (2.3%) performed from 1984 through 2005 developed severe perioperative acute graft failure either in the operating roomor within 24 h after cardiac transplantation. Four patients had primary graftfailure, two had right heart failure secondary to pulmonary hypertension, one hadhyperacute rejection, one had accelerated acute rejection and one possiblysustained a particulate coronary embolus intraoperatively.RESULTS: All except the two patients who had right heart failure secondary topulmonary hypertension received mechanical circulatory support. Three patientswere supported with total artificial hearts, two patients received a leftventricular assist device, one patient was supported with extracorporeal lifesupport followed by a right ventricular assist device when the left ventriclerecovered, and one patient was supported for several hours with cardiopulmonarybypass. Three patients were retransplanted after mechanical circulatory support, but only one survived. Only one of the nine patients (11%) survived; this patientwas supported with a total artificial heart followed by retransplantation.CONCLUSION: The outcome of severe perioperative acute graft failure is very poor.Mechanical circulatory support and retransplantation are not as successful as in other situations. Due to the shortage of donors and poor outcomes,retransplantation for hyperacute rejection is not advisable.PMCID: PMC2649186