: 18382208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1223. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2008 Apr;27(4):442-9. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2008.01.017.Decreased myocardial chromogranin a expression and colocalization with brainnatriuretic peptide during reverse cardiac remodeling after ventricularunloading.Wohlschlaeger J(1), von Winterfeld M, Milting H, El Banayosy A, Schmitz KJ,Takeda A, Takeda N, Azhari P, Schmid C, August C, Schmid KW, Baba HA.Author information: (1)Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, University Hospital Essen,University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany.AIMS: In chronic heart failure, atrial and brain natriuretic peptide expressionis increased and serves as a clinical marker of cardiac hypertrophy. ChromograninA is also up-regulated during chronic heart failure and associated with diseaseseverity and prognosis. Significant decrease of both natriuretic peptide andhypertrophy after left ventricular assist device (LVAD) treatment was reported.This study investigated whether chromogranin A and neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM)/CD56 are associated with cardiac hypertrophy and regulated by LVAD.METHODS: Expression of atrial and brain natriuretic peptide, chromogranin A, and NCAM/CD56 were investigated by immunohistochemistry and morphometricallyquantified in 33 paired myocardial samples before and after LVAD. In a different set of patients, chromogranin A was evaluated in the plasma. Cardiomyocytecolocalization of brain natriuretic peptide and chromogranin A was visualized by immunofluorescence doublestaining.RESULTS: Natriuretic peptide and chromogranin A protein expression issignificantly decreased after LVAD (p < 0.05). NCAM/CD56 expression remainsunaltered by unloading. In contrast with natriuretic peptide, chromogranin A and NCAM/CD56 expression is not correlated with cardiomyocyte diameters. Althoughincreased compared with controls, no significant differences for chromogranin Aplasma levels were found before and after LVAD. Sarcoplasmic colocalization ofchromogranin A and brain natriuretic peptide is considerably decreased afterLVAD.CONCLUSIONS: Neither chromogranin A nor CD56 is associated with cardiachypertrophy. Chromogranin A is significantly decreased by ventricular support.Sarcoplasmic colocalization of brain natriuretic peptide and chromogranin A isdiminished after unloading. However, owing to its low expression, the negativeregulation of chromogranin A is not reflected by plasma levels and thus does not appear to be an appropriate biomarker of reverse cardiac remodeling afterunloading.