: 15672786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1495. ASAIO J. 2004 Nov-Dec;50(6):xxxvii-xlii.The quest for permanent ventricular assistance: the role of aorticcounterpulsation.Jeevanandam V(1).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.Temporary aortic counterpulsation is used routinely for the management ofcardiogenic shock. By the perseverance of several investigators, permanent aorticcounterpulsation is close to becoming a clinical reality. The initial clinicalexperience with permanent aortic counterpulsation (KCV) has demonstrated that it can be implanted with very low peri-operative morbidity and mortality. It is anovel non-obligatory device that has several advantages over other existingdevices. There is no need for anti-coagulation and no valves or internalelectronics that could fail and force VAD replacement. The control algorithm issimple, as the device is triggered "on-demand" by the electrical activity of the native heart. Furthermore, it is non-obligatory, so it can be turned on/off atwill by the patient without increasing the risk of thromboembolic events. Thedisadvantages are that it provides only "partial" support. It increases cardiacoutput by approximately 40% depending on the afterload condition of the patient. It depends upon native heart activity to function and cannot be placed inpatients with severe biventricular function, uncontrolled tachyarrhythmias, orwith native valvular disease. However, the degree of support obtained seemssufficient to reverse the heart failure syndrome, improve end-organ dysfunctionand remove inotrope dependency. The KCV is designed for intervention in NYHAclass IV patients before there is severe biventricular failure or lack of anymyocardial reserve. It would not be an acute recovery device or one in which IABPpumping does not improve hemodynamics. The KCV can be considered equivalent to a mechanical, permanent, non-energy depleting inotrope and may have a role inimproving the length and quality of life in patients with end stage heartfailure. By treating advanced CHF early, the KCV may reduce the number ofpatients progressing towards cardiac replacement therapy with transplantation or a total artificial heart.