: 14628229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1583. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003 Nov;76(5):1593-7.Coagulation monitoring and management of anticoagulation during cardiac assistdevice support.Fries D(1), Innerhofer P, Streif W, Schobersberger W, Margreiter J, Antretter H, Hörmann C.Author information: (1)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, University of Innsbruck,Innsbruck, Austria. dietmar.fries@uibk.ac.atBACKGROUND: The incidence of clinically significant thromboembolic events due to the use of cardiac assist device systems remains high. Despite the considerableadvances in cardiac assist device technology, the monitoring and management ofthe hypercoagulable coagulation status, resulting from foreign surfaces of theassist device system, altered rheologic conditions, and blood stasis in therecipient heart remain a challenge. Moreover septic complications andinsufficient anticoagulation are responsible for thromboembolic events.METHODS: In addition to standard coagulation analysis, functional coagulationtests were performed including the use of a thrombelastographic monitoring system(ROTEG) and a platelet function analyzer (PFA-100).RESULTS: Severe biventricular ischemic heart failure developed in a 58-year-oldman with acute myocardial infarction and he needed a biventricular assist device for a bridge to cardiac transplantation. Although the patient receivedacenocoumarol (Sintrom; Novartis Pharma, Vienna, Austria) and acetylsalicylicacid (Aspisol; Bayer AG, Leverkusen, Germany) as usual, ROTEG and the PFA-100detected hypercoagulability while routine coagulation screening tests showedhypocoagulability. Moreover thrombus formation surrounding the canula of the leftventricular assist device was detected. Antithrombotic therapy with clopidogrel(Plavix) was initiated. Coagulation was closely monitored with modifiedthrombelastography and the PFA-100 to achieve sufficient but not overwhelminganticoagulation therapy. Three months after biventricular assist deviceimplantation the patient underwent successful transplantation with no major bloodloss.CONCLUSIONS: Thrombelastography should be the standard form of monitoring in suchpatients to decrease the risk of thromboembolic events and prevent bleedingcomplications.