: 25345547  [PubMed - in process]93. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Aug 15;7(9):5549-56. eCollection 2014.Pathological findings in cardiac apex removed during implantation of leftventricular assist devices (LVAD) are non-specific: 13-year-experience at aGerman Heart Center.Strecker T(1), Rösch J(1), Weyand M(1), Agaimy A(2).Author information: (1)Center of Cardiac Surgery, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-NurembergErlangen, Germany. (2)Institute of Pathology, Friedrich-Alexander-UniversityErlangen-Nuremberg Erlangen, Germany.BACKGROUND AND AIM: Ventricular assist devices (VAD) have become an establishedtherapy for patients with end-stage heart failure. The two main reasons for this development are the shortage of appropriate donor organs and the increasingnumber of patients waiting for heart transplantation (HTX). Furthermore, theenormous advances in the technical equipment and the rising clinical experiencehave improved the implantation technique, the durability and the long-termpatient outcomes.METHODS: We reviewed all cases of left ventricular assist device (LVAD)implantation at our Erlangen Heart Center during January 2000-July 2013. The mainaim of this study was to analyze the underlying pathology from the cardiac apexremoved during the implantation. From all patients, we created a follow-up,analyzed the pathological features with the clinical diagnoses and described the overall outcome.RESULTS: VAD implantation was performed in 266 cases at our center in the last 13years (2.2% of the total of 12254 cardiac surgical operations in that period).From these patients, 223 underwent LVAD or biventricular (BVAD) implantation; theremaining received a right (RVAD) implantation. The most frequent underlyingclinical diagnoses were dilated (n = 84, 37.7%, DCM) or ischemic (n = 61, 27.4%, ICM) cardiomyopathy. The pathological findings in the apex biopsy were generally non-specific and showed variable interstitial myocardial fibrosis with evidenceof fibre loss, fatty degeneration and variable irregular atrophy of musclefibres, consistent with dilated and ischemic cardiomyopathies as the mostfrequent causes of heart failure in these patients. Only a few cases showed otherspecific features such as myocarditis and AL-amyloidosis.CONCLUSIONS: Pathological findings in cardiac apex removed during LVADimplantation are rather non-specific and they generally reflect the late stage orconsequences of chronic myocardial damage in cases of dilated or ischemiccardiomyopathies. Variable patchy chronic inflammatory changes may be observed incardiomyopathies as a non-specific reaction caused by myocardial fiber damage andshould not lead to misinterpretation as evidence of myocarditis or revision oforiginal diagnosis.PMCID: PMC4203167