: 25350804  [PubMed - in process]90. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015 Jan;47(1):e29-33. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezu402. Epub2014 Oct 27.A promoter polymorphism -945C>G in the connective tissue growth factor in heartfailure patients with mechanical circulatory support: a new marker for bridge to recovery?Posch MG(1), Schmidt G(2), Steinhoff L(3), Perrot A(3), Drews T(2), Dandel M(2), Krabatsch T(2), Hetzer R(2), Potapov EV(2).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin (DHZB), Berlin, Germany Charité Research Organisation GmbH, Berlin,Germany maximilian.posch@charite.de. (2)Department of Cardiothoracic and VascularSurgery, Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin (DHZB), Berlin, Germany. (3)Cardiovascular Genetics, Experimental and Clinical Research Center (ECRC), a Joint Cooperationof the Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin and the Max Delbrück Center forMolecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.OBJECTIVES: Mechanical circulatory support (MCS) creates improvement of cardiacfunction in a small portion of patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy(iDCM). Among other factors, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy seems to represent animportant prerequisite for MCS-related cardiac recovery. We have previously shownthat connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) leads to adaptive cardiomyocytehypertrophy associated with a protective cardiac function in transgenic mice. To test whether a functional genetic variant in the CTGF promoter impactsMCS-related cardiac recovery, three groups of iDCM patients with and withoutcardiac recovery on MCS were genotyped.METHODS: The CTGF promoter variant (c.-945C>G) was analysed in 314 patients with iDCM receiving medical treatment only (Group I). Forty-nine iDCM patients whowere either weaned from MCS for more than 6 months (Group II; n=20) or bridged tocardiac transplantation (Group III: n=29) were also genotyped. Patients on MCSwere followed up for at least 12 months. Clinical characteristics and outcome on MCS were correlated with the respective genotypes.RESULTS: The c.-945C>G allele frequencies in 314 iDCM patients (Group I) weresimilar to controls deposited in the HapMap database or those published in arecent study. There were no differences in allele prevalence between patientswith mild to moderate iDCM (Group I) compared with patients with severe iDCMrequiring MCS (Groups II and III). Intriguingly, 50% of patients who were weaned from MCS (Group II) were homozygous for the G allele compared with only 17.2% of patients included in Group III, which is a significant difference (P=0.03).CONCLUSIONS: Homozygosity of the promoter-activating G allele in theCTGF_c.-945C>G variant is overrepresented in patients with cardiac recovery onMCS when compared with iDCM patients without cardiac recovery. Further studiesare needed to evaluate c.-945C>G as a genetic predictor for clinical outcome onMCS.© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.