: 10484539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1838. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999 Aug;68(2):684-7.Bridge to transplantation: the Penn State experience.Mavroidis D(1), Sun BC, Pae WE Jr.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, The Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, The Penn StateGeisinger Health System, Hershey 17033-0850, USA.BACKGROUND: During the past decade, ventricular assist devices as a bridge totransplantation have moved from the experimental arena to accepted therapy. Ourinstitution has been at the forefront of the development of this technology andconsequently has had extensive experience with the devices that are currentlyapproved by the Food and Drug Administration for use as a bridge to hearttransplantation.METHODS: The successful management of patients with assist devices hinges onpatient and device selection as well as perioperative management strategies. The routine use of agents such as aprotinin, vasopressin, milrinone, and inhalednitric oxide has contributed to successful management of these patients. Wepresent our perspectives on the advantages and disadvantages of theThermo-Cardiosystems HeartMate 1000 IP device and the Thoratec (Pierce-Donachy)system. We also discuss our protocols and methods for patient selection,preoperative preparation, intraoperative strategy, and postoperative managementthat have resulted in improved patient outcomes.RESULTS: More than 60 device implantation procedures have been performed sincethe inception of our bridge to transplantation program. During this time, twothirds of our patients were successfully bridged to transplantation. Of thesepatients, 92% were alive at 1 month after transplantation, and 83% were alive at 1 year after transplantation.CONCLUSIONS: Both support systems are effective in supporting patients to hearttransplantation. We have developed a preference for the Thermo-CardiosystemsHeartMate 1000 IP device because of its portability and associated better qualityof life. However, the Thoratec device is the more versatile device, andcircumstances exist when its use is clearly advantageous. In our institutionalexperience, outcome for bridging to transplantation has not been devicedependent.