: 12848082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1611. Cardiovasc Res. 2003 Jul 1;59(1):57-66.Mechanical unloading increases caveolin expression in the failing human heart.Uray IP(1), Connelly JH, Frazier OH, Taegtmeyer H, Davies PJ.Author information: (1)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, University of Texas atHouston Medical School, P.O. Box 20708, Houston, TX 77225, USA.OBJECTIVE: Implantation of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) in the failinghuman heart initiates structural and functional changes termed reverseremodeling. Mechanical unloading improves cardiac adrenergic responsiveness andlipid metabolism, processes regulated by caveolar function. We tested thehypothesis that mechanical unloading alters the expression of caveolins and thesechanges are linked to altered expression of markers of reverse remodeling.METHODS: Paired human myocardial samples were obtained from patients who receivedan LVAD as a bridge to cardiac transplantation. Transcript levels were measuredusing real-time Q-RT-PCR in RNA prepared from 34 pairs of formalin-fixedmyocardial tissue blocks. Caveolin-1 and -3 protein levels were determined fromfrozen tissue (n=5) by Western blots. Caveolin-3 localization was demonstrated byimmunohistochemistry.RESULTS: Caveolin-1 protein levels were upregulated in all LVAD-patients aftermechanical unloading (P=0.002). Caveolin-1 mRNA was increased in 76% of thepatients (n=34, P<0.001). Larger induction of caveolin-1 was associated withgreater suppression of ANF. Caveolin-3 transcript levels increased in 82% of the cohort, along with a 2.5-fold induction of caveolin-2. Sarcolemmal caveolin-3staining was increased after LVAD-support, although no change in total caveolin-3protein was detected. The mRNA levels of the caveolin-associated CD36 alsoincreased with unloading. Patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy showed greaterinduction of CD36 (P<0.05) than non-ischemic cases, as well as highly correlated changes in the expression of caveolin isoforms.CONCLUSION: Mechanical unloading induces the expression of caveolins and CD36.The induction of caveolin-1 and the reciprocal suppression of ANF suggest thatthe changes in the expression of both genes are linked to decreased hemodynamicload. Enhanced caveolin expression during mechanical unloading of failing humanhearts may be a part of the reverse remodeling of lipid metabolism, nitric oxide production and adrenergic signaling.