: 12829176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1612. Int J Artif Organs. 2003 May;26(5):395-400.Recovery of organ dysfunction during bridging to heart transplantation inchildren and adolescents.El-Banayosy NR(1), Arusoglu L, Kleikamp G, Minami K, Körfer R.Author information: (1)Clinic for Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart Center NorthRhine-Westphalia, Ruhr-University of Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.reiss@teleos-web.deThe beneficial effects of ventricular assist devices on organ dysfunction during bridging to heart transplantation have been widely reported in the adultpopulation. In contrast, the use of ventricular assist devices used asbridge-to-transplant in children is limited. To evaluate organ recovery duringventricular support in pediatric transplant candidate, respiratory, renal andhepatic function were reviewed retrospectively. The Thoratec device (strokevolume 65 ml) and the HIA-Medos-system (stroke volume 25/10 ml) were used asbridge-to transplant in 11 children and adolescents who were inlow-output-syndrome despite maximal pharmacological support. Prior toimplantation five patients were mechanically ventilated, six patients underwentcardiopulmonary resuscitation, eight patients had anuria (one treated byhemofiltration), three patients had liver dysfunction and four patients had signsof severe infection. At the time of implantation one patient was supported by theintraaortic balloon pump and one by the femorofemoral bypass for rapidhemodynamic stabilization. Eight patients were treated using the Thoratec device (one of these by Nova cor on the left side), three by the HIA-Medos system. Thesupport time ranged between seven and 140 days. Seven patients could be extubatedwithin three days. Renal function recovered in all pts. Liver enzymes decreasedin all pts without reaching normal values. Bilirubin values also decreased insurvivors but increased to 9.3 mg/dL in non-survivors. At least seven patientsunderwent successful heart transplantation, three patients died because ofmultiorgan failure after extended transfusion and one patient because oftechnical failure. In our experience the hemodynamic situation was sufficient in all bridging to transplant candidates. In all patients who underwent successfultransplantation, transplantability was associated with rapid organ recoverywithin seven days after initiating mechanical assistance. Extended bloodtranfusions, combined failure of three organs and increasing bilirubin valuesduring support seem to be predictors of poor outcome.