: 12809252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1621. Z Arztl Fortbild Qualitatssich. 2003 Apr;97(2):127-32.[Therapeutic perspectives in heart failure]].[Article in German]Müller-Ehmsen J(1), Schwinger RH.Author information: (1)Klinik III für Innere Medizin der Universität zu Köln.muller.ehmsen@uni-koeln.deMany different diseases may lead to heart failure. Nevertheless, the symptoms andpathophysiological changes in heart failure are uniform as are the basicprinciples of treatment. Although significant progress has been achieved inunderstanding the biology of heart failure and the therapeutic options, thequality of life of heart failure patients and their survival are often poor.Since cardiac transplantation as a final therapeutic option is limited by theavailability of donor organs, new strategies and technologies need to be exploredto treat the failing heart effectively. Approaches to improve the medical therapyof heart failure mainly focus on strategies to escape the vicious circle ofdecreased contractility and neurohumoral activation. Substances with promisingexperimental and clinical results include neutral endopeptidase inhibitors,endothelin antagonists or cytokine inhibitors, e.g. TNF antagonists. Mechanicaland electrical devices are under development such as left ventricular assistdevices (LVADs), biventricular pacemakers and artificial hearts, which may becomevaluable alternative therapies. Gene therapy approaches aim to improve thevascularization of the heart, the Ca-homeostasis of the myocytes or the survival of cardiac cells in disease. Finally, cellular cardiomyoplasty is a relativelynovel approach to replace or support the cardiomyocytes of the diseased heart by implanting new ones. Which cell type under which conditions will turn out to bethe most suitable is still unknown and subject to debate. Ongoing clinicalstudies will only help to demonstrate the safety and feasibility of thistechnique but not determine its long-term efficacy. It is highly desirable thatone of these new therapeutic strategies or a combination of them will have asignificant impact on the future management of heart failure. Currently, our mainclinical focus must be to treat as many patients as possible with drugs that are known to improve symptoms and survival, like ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers,cardiac glycosides, diuretics and spironolactone.