: 12821162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1616. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003 Jun;75(6 Suppl):S86-92.Surgical management of patients in the REMATCH trial.Richenbacher WE(1), Naka Y, Raines EP, Frazier OH, Couper GS, Pagani FD, Damme L,VanMeter CH, Magovern GJ Jr, Gupta L, Seemuth SC, Weinberg AD, Long JW; REMATCHInvestigators.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.wayne-richenbacher@uiowa.eduThe donor shortage makes cardiac transplantation a less than ideal treatment for end-stage heart failure. The utility of the left ventricular assist device (LVAD)as a permanent form of circulatory support has recently been established in theREMATCH (Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment ofCongestive Heart Failure) trial. In this report, we describe the surgicalmanagement of LVAD patients in REMATCH and their short-term outcomes. Between1998 and 2001, 129 patients with end-stage heart failure, who were excluded from consideration for transplantation, were enrolled in the REMATCH clinical trial.Patients were randomized to two treatment arms: optimal medical management orHeartMate vented electric LVAD implantation. The primary end point of the studywas death from any cause. Secondary end points included the incidence of serious adverse events, the duration of hospitalization, quality of life, and functional status. Sixty-eight patients received an LVAD, 55 (81%) of whom survived forlonger than 1 month. The median intensive care unit and hospital lengths of stay (LOS) for those that survived at least 1 month were 15 and 34 days, respectively.Sixty-seven (99%) patients had a serious adverse event. The rates ofperioperative bleeding, late bleeding, right heart failure, and sepsis were 0.42,0.53, 0.15, and 0.53 events/patient-year, respectively. Factors predictive of alonger LOS for the implant hospitalization included sepsis, age, and latebleeding (p < 0.0001). The patients' New York Heart Association functional class improved significantly at 1 month compared with base line (p < 0.001). Functionalclass improved in LVAD-supported patients despite a high adverse event rate. Mostadverse events occurred within 30 days of device implantation. Sepsis, age, andlate bleeding were the major determinants of LOS.