: 20926461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]901. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011 Feb;30(2):164-74. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2010.08.003.Infectious complications after pulsatile-flow and continuous-flow leftventricular assist device implantation.Schaffer JM(1), Allen JG, Weiss ES, Arnaoutakis GJ, Patel ND, Russell SD, ShahAS, Conte JV.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiac Surgery, The Johns HopkinsHospital, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.BACKGROUND: Infection is a significant source of morbidity and mortality afterleft ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation. Newer generationcontinuous-flow (CF) LVADs are smaller, requiring smaller pump pockets anddrive-line exit sites as compared with pulsatile-flow (PF) devices. With theirrecent adoption, CF device patients benefit from improved provider experience in the detection and treatment of infectious complications. Given these advances in design and experience, we examined the incidence of infectious complications inpatients receiving CF and PF devices.METHODS: We reviewed patients who received CF or PF LVADs (June 2000 to May 2009)at our institution. Incidences and timing of systemic infections (bacteremia,sepsis, severe sepsis, septic shock), device-associated infections (drive-line,LVAD pocket, sternal wound) and non-device-associated infections(catheter-related bloodstream, pneumonia, urinary tract) were compared betweendevices. Primary outcomes were sepsis, severe sepsis, a composite of drive-lineand LVAD pocket infection, and catheter-related bloodstream infection.RESULTS: Of 133 LVADs, 86 were CF. CF patients had lower pre-operative risk, morerecent device implantation, and longer LVAD support time. Device type was highly correlated with reduced infections; however, on multivariate analysis,implantation date appeared to drive this association. Kaplan-Meier estimates offreedom from all primary outcomes were improved with more recent implantation (p < 0.05). On multivariate analysis, implantation date was predictive of allprimary outcomes except severe sepsis, for which advanced age and worse SeattleHeart Failure Model score were predictive.CONCLUSION: In this institutional review of post-LVAD infections, a decrease ininfectious complications in CF patients was likely related to increased provider experience associated with a more recent date of implantation.Copyright © 2011 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.