: 11568061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1726. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2001 Sep;20(9):949-55.The time course of natriuretic hormones as plasma markers of myocardial recovery in heart transplant candidates during ventricular assist device support revealsdifferences among device types.Milting H(1), EL Banayosy A, Kassner A, Fey O, Sarnowski P, Arusoglu L,Thieleczek R, Brinkmann T, Kleesiek K, Körfer R.Author information: (1)Klinik für Thorax-und Kardiovaskularchirurgie, Biochemisches Forschungslabor, Bochum, Germany. hmilting@hdz-nrw.deBACKGROUND: The natriuretic hormones ANP and BNP are expressed differently in themyocardium. Both hormones have compensatory diuretic activity during heartfailure. Mechanical stretch of the myocardial walls induces the expression ofthese hormones. In failing human myocardium, both ANP and BNP are transcribed in the ventricular myocardium in high amounts. We measured the plasma concentrationsof ANP and BNP in patients supported by various ventricular assist devices (VADs)at various times. We analyzed the time courses of ANP and BNP to determine (1)the time scale of their down-regulation as a marker of putative myocardialrecovery, (2) their steady-state levels under VAD support and (3) differencescaused by various VAD devices.METHODS: We analyzed ANP and BNP using commercially available radioimmune assays.We analyzed the time courses of patients supported by Thoratec (THO) LVAD (n =8), TCI Heartmate (TCI) (n = 6), Novacor (NOV) (n = 7), and Lionheart (LIO) (n = 3).RESULTS: Patients supported with NOV and some patients with TCI showeddown-regulation of BNP to a steady-state level at 30 to 50 days, following asingle exponential decay. In contrast, patients supported by THO or LIO did notreveal a determined time course of the natriuretic hormones. Only a few patients reached normal plasma values during VAD support.CONCLUSION: The time courses of ANP and BNP differ among VAD types because ofconstruction and/or driving mode, which might be important when consideringpatients for weaning from VAD without heart transplant.