: 23972933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]366. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013 Nov;32(11):1096-100. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2013.07.007. Epub 2013 Aug 19.Morphologic changes in the aortic wall media after support with a continuous-flowleft ventricular assist device.Segura AM(1), Gregoric I, Radovancevic R, Demirozu ZT, Buja LM, Frazier OH.Author information: (1)(a)Departments of Cardiovascular Pathology Research , Texas Heart Institute,Houston. Electronic address: asegura@texasheart.org.BACKGROUND: Continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) providedurable, reliable, energy-efficient long-term support. However, the biologiceffects of continuous flow are not completely known. Therefore, we examinedaortic wall morphology in patients with heart failure before and after prolonged circulatory support with a continuous-flow LVAD.METHODS: After applying a partial aortic occlusion vascular clamp in the lowerhalf of the ascending aorta, we removed samples of aortic wall tissue and thenattached the outflow graft of the pump. Samples were obtained from 11 patients (9men and 2 women, mean age 65 ± 7 years) with severe heart failure at the time of LVAD implantation. We obtained matched specimens at explantation after hearttransplantation (n = 5) or autopsy (n = 6). These specimens were removed from thedistal ascending aorta, remote from the aortic anastomotic site. Tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, Movat's pentachrome and Masson'strichrome. Smooth muscle actin immunohistochemistry was performed on allsections. To evaluate the morphology of the aortic wall media, we quantitatively graded tissue sections for medial thickness, medial degenerative changes, smooth muscle cell (SMC) disorientation and depletion, elastic fiber fragmentation anddepletion, medial fibrosis and atherosclerotic changes.RESULTS: The mean duration of support was 140 ± 136 days (range 87 to 580 days). The histologic evaluation and comparison of specimens obtained before and afterLVAD support showed significantly increased foci of medial degeneration, SMCdepletion, elastic fiber fragmentation, medial fibrosis and atheroscleroticchanges after LVAD support. Mean medial thickness was not significantly differentafter LVAD support. We observed similar changes between samples obtained attransplantation and those obtained at autopsy.CONCLUSIONS: After continuous-flow LVAD support, the morphology of the aorticwall media was altered in all of our patients. The clinical relevance of thesefindings is unknown.© 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. All rightsreserved.