: 15089990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1547. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2004 Mar;19(2):148-53.The role of bridge to transplantation: should LVAD patients be transplanted?Birks EJ(1), Yacoub MH, Banner NR, Khaghani A.Author information: (1)Transplant Unit, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, Harefield, Middlesex,UK. e.birks@ic.ac.ukPURPOSE OF REVIEW: The decrease in useable donor organs means an increasingnumber of patients are requiring support with a left ventricular assist device(LVAD) for survival when their clinical status deteriorates beforetransplantation. We address whether these patients should be transplanted, if so,with what priority, and when and if they are not transplanted, what are thealternatives?RECENT FINDINGS: The perioperative mortality and morbidity of LVAD insertionremains high. Infection and device failure still limit the safety of long periodsof bridging and might necessitate earlier transplantation. Early results suggest that the smaller impeller pumps may be associated with a lower incidence ofdevice failure and infection, but with more thromboembolic and hemorrhagiccomplications. Transplantation of LVAD patients results in survival rates as goodas those with conventional transplantation, and the survival benefit is betterthan for non-LVAD-supported patients. A small number of LVAD patients have shown a significant improvement in myocardial function, sufficient enough to allowexplantation of the device. The proportion of these patients has previously been reported to be as low as 5%, but a strategy to maximize recovery has allowed pumpremoval in approximately two thirds of dilated cardiomyopathy patients. In arecent destination therapy trial, survival in LVAD patients was superior to thoseon medical therapy, but the frequency of infection, bleeding, and malfunction of the device was higher.SUMMARY: LVAD technology is continuing to evolve quickly, while transplantationis here to stay. The interaction between these two powerful modalities requirescontinued thoughtful evaluation for maximal benefit to patients.