: 12633697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1648. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Mar 5;41(5):879-88.Autologous skeletal myoblasts transplanted to ischemia-damaged myocardium inhumans. Histological analysis of cell survival and differentiation.Pagani FD(1), DerSimonian H, Zawadzka A, Wetzel K, Edge AS, Jacoby DB, DinsmoreJH, Wright S, Aretz TH, Eisen HJ, Aaronson KD.Author information: (1)Section of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. fpagani@umich.eduComment in    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Aug 6;42(3):589.OBJECTIVES: We report histological analysis of hearts from patients withend-stage heart disease who were transplanted with autologous skeletal myoblasts concurrent with left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation.BACKGROUND: Autologous skeletal myoblast transplantation is under investigationas a means to repair infarcted myocardium. To date, there is only indirectevidence to suggest survival of skeletal muscle in humans.METHODS: Five patients (all male; median age 60 years) with ischemiccardiomyopathy, refractory heart failure, and listed for heart transplantationunderwent muscle biopsy from the quadriceps muscle. The muscle specimen wasshipped to a cell isolation facility where myoblasts were isolated and grown.Patients received a transplant of 300 million cells concomitant with LVADimplantation. Four patients underwent LVAD explant after 68, 91, 141, and 191days of LVAD support (three transplant, one LVAD death), respectively. Onepatient remains alive on LVAD support awaiting heart transplantation.RESULTS: Skeletal muscle cell survival and differentiation into mature myofibers were directly demonstrated in scarred myocardium from three of the four explantedhearts using an antibody against skeletal muscle-specific myosin heavy chain. An increase in small vessel formation was observed in one of three patients at thesite of surviving myotubes, but not in adjacent tissue devoid of engrafted cells.CONCLUSIONS: These findings represent demonstration of autologous myoblast cellsurvival in human heart. The implanted skeletal myoblasts formed viable grafts inheavily scarred human myocardial tissue. These results establish the feasibility of myoblast transplants for myocardial repair in humans.