: 22841254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]598. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Oct 2;60(14):1278-87. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2012.04.047.Epub 2012 Jul 26.Human cardiac progenitor cells engineered with Pim-I kinase enhance myocardialrepair.Mohsin S(1), Khan M, Toko H, Bailey B, Cottage CT, Wallach K, Nag D, Lee A,Siddiqi S, Lan F, Fischer KM, Gude N, Quijada P, Avitabile D, Truffa S, CollinsB, Dembitsky W, Wu JC, Sussman MA.Author information: (1)SDSU Heart Research Institute, San Diego State University, 5500 CampanileDrive, San Diego, CA 92182, USA.Comment in    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Oct 2;60(14):1288-90.OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to demonstrate the enhancement of humancardiac progenitor cell (hCPC) reparative and regenerative potential by geneticmodification for the treatment of myocardial infarction.BACKGROUND: Regenerative potential of stem cells to repair acute infarction islimited. Improved hCPC survival, proliferation, and differentiation intofunctional myocardium will increase efficacy and advance translationalimplementation of cardiac regeneration.METHODS: hCPCs isolated from the myocardium of heart failure patients undergoing left ventricular assist device implantation were engineered to express greenfluorescent protein (hCPCe) or Pim-1-GFP (hCPCeP). Functional tests of hCPCregenerative potential were performed with immunocompromised mice by usingintramyocardial adoptive transfer injection after infarction. Myocardialstructure and function were monitored by echocardiographic and hemodynamicassessment for 20 weeks after delivery. hCPCe and hCPCeP expressing luciferasewere observed by using bioluminescence imaging to noninvasively trackpersistence.RESULTS: hCPCeP exhibited augmentation of reparative potential relative to hCPCe control cells, as shown by significantly increased proliferation coupled withamelioration of infarction injury and increased hemodynamic performance at 20weeks post-transplantation. Concurrent with enhanced cardiac structure andfunction, hCPCeP demonstrated increased cellular engraftment and differentiation with improved vasculature and reduced infarct size. Enhanced persistence ofhCPCeP versus hCPCe was revealed by bioluminescence imaging at up to 8 weekspost-delivery.CONCLUSIONS: Genetic engineering of hCPCs with Pim-1 enhanced repair of damagedmyocardium. Ex vivo gene delivery to modify stem cells has emerged as a viableoption addressing current limitations in the field. This study demonstrates that efficacy of hCPCs from the failing myocardium can be safely and significantlyenhanced through expression of Pim-1 kinase, setting the stage for use ofengineered cells in pre-clinical settings.Copyright © 2012 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by ElsevierInc. All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC3461098