: 11265874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1748. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001 Mar;71(3 Suppl):S77-81; discussion S82-5.The use of extracorporeal life support in adult patients with primary cardiacfailure as a bridge to implantable left ventricular assist device.Pagani FD(1), Aaronson KD, Swaniker F, Bartlett RH.Author information: (1)Section of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109, USA.fpagani@umich.eduBACKGROUND: Extracorporeal life support (ECLS) is an effective technique forproviding emergent circulatory assistance, and may represent a life-saving optionin patients who might not initially be considered a candidate for other forms of circulatory support (extracorporeal or implantable left ventricular assist device[LVAD]). In the setting of cardiac arrest, ECLS represents the only viable methodof initiating circulatory support. However, ECLS has a number of disadvantagesthat include high complication rates (eg, stroke, bleeding) and a limitedduration of potential support, which have prevented its widespread acceptance,particularly in the adult population. With the increased successful applicationof long-term implantable LVADs as a bridge to transplant, the major limitation ofECLS could be overcome by bridging patients to a long-term implantable LVAD("bridge to bridge"), thereby reducing the reluctance to utilize ECLS whenindicated. After acquisition of the HeartMate LVAD (Thermo Cardiosystems, Inc,Woburn, MA) we investigated the use of ECLS as a bridge to an implantable LVADand subsequent transplantation in selected high-risk patients.METHODS AND RESULTS: From Oct 1, 1996 to Sept 30, 2000, 33 adult patientspresenting with cardiac arrest or severe hemodynamic instability were placed onECLS for the bridge to bridge indication. Of the 33 patients, 10 patientssurvived to LVAD implant, 1 was bridged directly to transplant, 5 weaned fromECLS, and 16 died on ECLS. Overall, 12 patients survived to discharge. One-yearactuarial survival from the initiation of ECLS was 36%. One-year actuarialsurvival from the time of LVAD implant, conditional on surviving ECLS, was 80%.CONCLUSIONS: The 1-year survival of adult patients placed on ECLS and whosubsequently survived to an implantable LVAD was favorable. These data support a strategy of ECLS to implantable LVAD bridge to heart transplant in adult patientswho are in need of circulatory support and who are not initially candidates forother forms of mechanical support. The favorable results of this strategy supportutilization of ECLS even in situations where myocardial recovery is thought to beunlikely.