: 20646936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]928. J Card Surg. 2010 Jul;25(4):490-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2010.01075.x.Long-term continuous flow left ventricular assist device support and end-organfunction: prospects for destination therapy.Slaughter MS(1).Author information: (1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Louisville,Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA. mark.slaughter@louisville.eduPulsatile flow left ventricular assist devices (PF-LVADs) have successfullysupported patients with severe heart failure for bridge-to-transplant (BTT) anddestination therapy (DT). End-organ dysfunction is often reversed, optimizing thepatient's condition to enhance survival, and quality of life. Questions have beenraised regarding the potential for continuous flow LVADs (CF-LVADs) to providethe same quality of circulatory support. Prior research showing that PF issuperior to continuous, non-PF does not appear to be relevant with CF-LVADs forBTT and DT. Under most clinical conditions, arterial pulsatility is presentduring CF-LVAD support, and this type of support should not be termed"nonpulsatile." Clinical studies have shown that renal, hepatic, andneurocognitive function is either maintained within a normal range, or issignificantly improved, during CF-LVAD support for durations up to 15 months.Results of the randomized clinical trial between the CF HeartMate II and thepulsatile HeartMate XVE (both by Thoratec Corp, Pleasanton, CA, USA) are pending final US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) review and are not yet published.Studies of microcirculation during CF-LVAD support indicate that capillary blood flow is adequate to support cellular function. There are anecdotal cases ofpatients being supported with a CF-LVAD for over seven years with preservedend-organ function. Presently, there are no clinical reports indicating thatend-organ function is not well maintained. Current clinical evidence indicatesthat end-organ perfusion and function can be well maintained for extendeddurations of support with a CF-LVAD.