: 17383390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1312. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Mar 20;49(11):1166-74. Epub 2007 Mar 7.The impact of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy on theextracellular collagen matrix during left ventricular assist device support inpatients with end-stage heart failure.Klotz S(1), Danser AH, Foronjy RF, Oz MC, Wang J, Mancini D, D'Armiento J,Burkhoff D.Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, ColumbiaUniversity, New York, New York, USA.Comment in    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Mar 20;49(11):1175-7.OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition (ACE-I)during left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support in patients with end-stageheart failure prevents potentially deleterious effects on the extracellularmatrix.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist device-induced mechanical unloading increasesmyocardial collagen and stiffness and may contribute to the low rate of recovery.METHODS: Heart samples obtained before and after LVAD implantation were dividedinto groups depending on whether the patients received (n = 7) or did not receive(control; n = 15) ACE-I. At transplant, ex vivo pressure-volume relationshipswere measured and chamber and myocardial stiffness constants determined.Myocardial tissue content of angiotensin (Ang) I and II, matrix metalloproteinase(MMP)-1, tissue inhibitor of MMPs (TIMP)-1, and total and cross-linked collagenwas measured.RESULTS: Duration of support was comparable between ACE-I and control subjects(96 +/- 65 days vs. 109 +/- 22 days). Pre-LVAD Ang I and II and total andcross-linked collagen were similar between groups. Post-LVAD, Ang II was reduced in the ACE-I group but increased in control subjects (181 +/- 7 fmol/g vs. 262+/- 41 fmol/g; p < 0.05). Similarly, cross-linked collagen decreased during LVAD support in the ACE-I group. Left ventricular (LV) mass and myocardial stiffnesswere lower in the ACE-I group. ACE-I normalized the LV and right ventricular (RV)MMP-1/TIMP-1 ratio. Collagen content and characteristics of the RV were notaffected by ACE-I.CONCLUSIONS: ACE-I therapy was associated with decreased Ang II, myocardialcollagen content, and myocardial stiffness during LVAD support. This is the firstdemonstration of a pharmacologic therapy that can impact myocardial propertiesduring mechanical unloading, and it could foster new lines of investigation instrategies of enhancing myocardial recovery during LVAD support.