: 20888256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]903. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011 Jan;30(1):59-63. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2010.08.025.Epub 2010 Sep 29.Surgical closure of left ventricular outflow tract after left ventricular assist device implantation in patients with aortic valve pathology.Cohn WE(1), Demirozu ZT, Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Center for Cardiac Support, Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's EpiscopalHospital, Houston, Texas, USA.BACKGROUND: In patients with refractory heart failure, aortic valve (AV)insufficiency or the presence of a prosthetic AV has been considered a relativecontraindication to left ventricular assist device (LVAD) therapy. Nevertheless, we have successfully implanted LVADs in 5 patients with native AV insufficiencyor an AV prosthesis by closing the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT).METHODS: The method of LVOT closure was tailored to the patients' differingcircumstances. Patient 1 had a regurgitant tri-leaflet native AV. Patient 2 hadundergone previous aortic root reconstruction with a porcine bioprosthesis.Patient 3 had a congenitally bicuspid AV with significant insufficiency. Patient 4 had a native tri-leaflet valve that developed thrombus and insufficiency after previous LVAD placement. Patient 5 required removal of a recently placedmechanical AV. Accordingly, the LVOT was closed with a bovine pericardial patchin Patients 1, 4 and 5, and the lines of coaptation of the AV leaflets wereclosed primarily in Patients 2 and 3.RESULTS: Four months post-operatively, 1 patient underwent heart transplantation;on removal of the heart, LVOT patch integrity was confirmed visually. After afollow-up period of 6 months to 2 years, the remaining 4 patients are in New YorkHeart Association Functional Class I while awaiting cardiac transplantation.Transesophageal echocardiography has confirmed persistent LVOT closure.CONCLUSION: In all 5 cases, LVOT closure circumvented the challenges associatedwith LVAD therapy in the presence of native AV insufficiency or an AV prosthesis.Copyright © 2011 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.