: 21076718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]888. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2010 Dec;12(6):549-65. doi:10.1007/s11936-010-0093-6.Mechanical circulatory support for advanced heart failure.Patel CB(1), Alexander KM, Rogers JG.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3034 DUMC, Durham,NC, 27710, USA.OPINION STATEMENT: Both acute and chronic systolic heart failure can progress to an advanced phase, resulting in stage D heart failure and even cardiogenic shock.Despite significant progress in the treatment of systolic heart failure usingmedical and device therapies, this terminal phase continues to be prevalent andassociated with unacceptably high morbidity and mortality. Given the inability tooffer cardiac transplantation to the majority of those presenting with advancedheart failure, alternative strategies for cardiac replacement therapy are oftenrequired. Although there has been interest in using mechanical devices to supportthe circulation since the advent of cardiopulmonary bypass, it is only in thepast 20 years that ventricular assist devices (VAD) have become viable optionsfor therapy. Indeed, we are now entering an era where circulatory assist devices are being used not only to temporarily support patients with post-cardiotomyshock, but also as a long-term treatment in ambulatory heart failure patients.Furthermore, we are now able to utilize data from multicenter trials andregistries to guide treatment decisions. These data have clearly shown that VADs improve survival and quality of life in patients with advanced heart failure whenimplanted as a temporary measure (bridge to recovery and bridge to transplant) oras long-term support (destination therapy). However, with a growing heart failurepopulation there is much work to be done to improve VAD technology, patientselection, post-implantation management, and to define the optimal role forassist devices in the management of systolic heart failure. We are also in thenascent stages of fully understanding the impact of mechanical support on thefailing myocardium, and developing research methodologies to study noveltherapies in tandem with VADs to facilitate ventricular recovery. These importantquestions are currently being addressed in ongoing clinical trials, registryanalyses, and translational research endeavors.