: 12940897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1599. J Extra Corpor Technol. 2003 Jun;35(2):115-20.Pulsatile mechanical cardiac assistance in pediatric patients with the Berlinheart ventricular assist device.Merkle F(1), Boettcher W, Stiller B, Hetzer R.Author information: (1)Academy for Perfusion, Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery,Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin, Germany. merkle@dhzb.deMechanical cardiac assistance for neonates, infants, children and adolescents maybe accomplished with pulsatile ventricular assist devices (VAD) instead ofextracorporeal membrane oxygenation or centrifugal pumps. The Berlin Heart VADconsists of extracorporeal, pneumatically driven blood pumps for pulsatileuniventricular or biventricular assistance for patients of all age groups. Theblood pumps are heparin-coated. The stationary driving unit (IKUS) has therequired enhanced compressor performance for pediatric pump sizes. The BerlinHeart VAD was used in a total number of 424 patients from 1987 to November 2001at our institution. In 45 pediatric patients aged 2 days-17 years the BerlinHeart VAD was applied for long-term support (1-111 days, mean 20 days). Therewere three patient groups: Group I: "Bridge to transplantation" with variousforms of cardiomyopathy (N = 21) or chronic stages of congenital heart disease (N= 9); Group II: "Rescue" in intractable heart failure after corrective surgeryfor congenital disease (N = 7) or in early graft failure after hearttransplantation (N = 1); and Group III: "Acute myocarditis" (N = 7) as eitherbridge to transplantation or bridge to recovery. Seventeen patients weretransplanted after support periods of between 4 and 111 days with 12 long-termsurvivors, having now survived for up to 10 years. Five patients (Groups I andIII) were weaned from the system with four long-term survivors. In Group II only one patient survived after successful transplantation. Prolonged circulatorysupport with the Berlin Heart VAD is an effective method for bridging untilcardiac recovery or transplantation in the pediatric age group. Extubation,mobilization, and enteral nutrition are possible. For long-term use, the BerlinHeart VAD offers advantages over centrifugal pumps and ECMO in respect to patientmobility and safety.