: 24418732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]276. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Jan;33(1):23-34. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.12.001.Epub 2013 Dec 12.An analysis of pump thrombus events in patients in the HeartWare ADVANCE bridgeto transplant and continued access protocol trial.Najjar SS(1), Slaughter MS(2), Pagani FD(3), Starling RC(4), McGee EC(5), Eckman P(6), Tatooles AJ(7), Moazami N(4), Kormos RL(8), Hathaway DR(9), Najarian KB(9),Bhat G(7), Aaronson KD(3), Boyce SW(10); HVAD Bridge to Transplant ADVANCE Trial Investigators.Collaborators: Acker M, Najjar S, Conte J, Pham DT, Slaughter M, Mallidi H,Chaparro S, Icenogle T, Jeevanandam V, Kormos R, Meyer D, Milano C, Pae W, PaganiF, Oyer P, Klodell C, Smedira N, Sai-Sudhakar C, Vega D, Wozniak T, McGee E,Silvestry S, Morgan J, John R, Tatooles A, Rongione A, Salerno C, Goldstein D,Downey F, Arabia F.Author information: (1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Cardiac Surgery, MedStar Heart Institute,Washington, DC. Electronic address: samer.s.najjar@medstar.net. (2)Division ofCardiothoracic Surgery, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky.(3)Section of Cardiac Surgery and Division of Cardiovascular Diseases, Universityof Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (4)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine andCardiothoracic Surgery, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic,Cleveland, Ohio. (5)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Northwestern University,Chicago, Illinois. (6)Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, Universityof Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota. (7)Center for Heart Transplant and AssistDevices, Advocate Christ Medical Center, Oak Lawn, Illinois. (8)Heart andVascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania. (9)Clinical Affairs, HeartWare Inc, Framingham, Massachusetts.(10)Departments of Internal Medicine and Cardiac Surgery, MedStar HeartInstitute, Washington, DC.BACKGROUND: The HeartWare left ventricular assist device (HVAD, HeartWare Inc,Framingham, MA) is the first implantable centrifugal continuous-flow pumpapproved for use as a bridge to transplantation. An infrequent but seriousadverse event of LVAD support is thrombus ingestion or formation in the pump. In this study, we analyze the incidence of pump thrombus, evaluate the comparativeeffectiveness of various treatment strategies, and examine factors pre-disposing to the development of pump thrombus.METHODS: The analysis included 382 patients who underwent implantation of theHVAD as part of the HeartWare Bridge to Transplant (BTT) and subsequent ContinuedAccess Protocol (CAP) trial. Descriptive statistics and group comparisons weregenerated to analyze baseline characteristics, incidence of pump thrombus, andtreatment outcomes. A multivariate analysis was performed to assess significantrisk factors for developing pump thrombus.RESULTS: There were 34 pump thrombus events observed in 31 patients (8.1% of the cohort) for a rate of 0.08 events per patient-year. The incidence of pumpthrombus did not differ between BTT and CAP. Medical management of pump thrombus was attempted in 30 cases, and was successful in 15 (50%). A total of 16 patientsunderwent pump exchange, and 2 underwent urgent transplantation. Five patientswith a pump thrombus died after medical therapy failed, 4 of whom also underwent a pump exchange. Survival at 1 year in patients with and without a pump thrombus was 69.4% and 85.5%, respectively (p = 0.21). A multivariable analysis revealedthat significant risk factors for pump thrombus included a mean arterial pressure> 90 mm Hg, aspirin dose ≤ 81 mg, international normalized ratio ≤ 2, andInteragency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS)profile level of ≥ 3 at implant.CONCLUSIONS: Pump thrombus is a clinically important adverse event in patientsreceiving an HVAD, occurring at a rate of 0.08 events per patient-year.Significant risk factors for pump thrombosis include elevated blood pressure and sub-optimal anti-coagulation and anti-platelet therapies. This suggests that pumpthrombus event rates could be reduced through careful adherence to patientmanagement guidelines.© 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Published byInternational Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation All rights reserved.