: 21554567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]795. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011 Jul;13(7):785-95. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfr050. Epub 2011May 6.The effect of ventricular assist devices on long-term post-transplant outcomes: asystematic review of observational studies.Alba AC(1), McDonald M, Rao V, Ross HJ, Delgado DH.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology and Heart Transplantation, Toronto General Hospital,585 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. carolina.alba@uhn.on.caAIMS: Ventricular assist device (VAD) therapy is widely used as a bridge tocardiac transplant. Studies addressing the effect of VADs on post-transplantoutcomes have shown conflicting results. It is imperative to review this evidenceto inform clinical decision making and future research. Our aim was tosystematically evaluate the effect of VAD therapy on long-term post-transplantoutcomes in heart transplant recipients.METHODS AND RESULTS: We searched online databases (Medline, PubMed, Embase, andCINAHL) and references of included articles. Comparative studies evaluating theeffect of VADs on post-transplant outcomes in adults were included and studyresults were meta-analysed using random-effects models. We conducted subgroupanalyses to assess the effect estimate of extra- vs. intra-corporeal VADs and to evaluate the impact of transplant era and listing status. Overall, we identified 31 observational studies. One-year post-transplant mortality in recipientsbridged with an extra-corporeal VAD was significantly higher than in non-bridged recipients (RR 1.8, 95% CI 1.53-2.13, I(2)= 1%), while patients supported with anintra-corporeal VAD had similar mortality to non-bridged recipients (RR 1.08, 95%CI 0.95-1.22, I(2)= 0%). The risks of rejection within the first post-transplant year and coronary allograft vasculopathy were not significantly different betweenpatients with or without VAD support prior to transplant. Publication bias waslow; however, the risk of bias across studies was moderate to high.CONCLUSION: Intra-corporeal VAD support does not have a deleterious impact onpost-transplant outcomes. However, post-transplant survival may be poorer in the subgroup of patients supported with extra-corporeal devices. Studies with greatermethodological rigour are warranted.