: 15800020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1475. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005 Apr;24(4):454-61.Fluorescence imaging microscopy of cellular markers in ischemic vs non-ischemiccardiomyopathy after left ventricular unloading.Bick RJ(1), Bagwell SH, Jones CE, Poindexter BJ, Buja LM, Youker KA, Grigore A,Clubb F, Radovancevic B, Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Department of Organ Transplantation Cardiovascular Pathology, Texas HeartInstitute and St. Lukes Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.roger.j.bick@uth.tmc.eduBACKGROUND: The heart undergoes repair and initiates protective mechanisms viaventricular unloading. We examined the presence of 2 markers in pre-unloaded and post-unloaded human cardiac tissue that are important indicators of cardiacfailure, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and inducible nitric oxide synthase. We alsomeasured 2 nuclear transcription factors, NFkappaB50 and NFkappaB65, comparingquantities and localizations to determine if mechanical unloading reduced theirpresence, as these markers are also thought to be indicators of impending heartfailure. Amounts and localizations in patients that had been diagnosed witheither ischemic or non-ischemic cardiomyopathy were compared after mechanicalunloading with a left ventricular assist device. To establish that unloading had been achieved, levels of atrial natriuretic protein were determined.METHODS: Core biopsies were harvested at assist device implantation and removal. Fluorescence deconvolution microscopy image reconstructions of fluorescenceprobes were correlated with data obtained by western Blot and electrobility shiftassays.RESULTS: Statistically significant differences in localization and amounts oftumor necrosis factor and nitric oxide synthase were seen between pre- andpost-assist device samples. Amounts of tumor necrosis factor and nitric oxidesynthase in ischemic tissue were increased at the time of assist device removal, but decreased in dilated or idiomyopathic samples. Ventricular unloading resultedin reduced levels of natriuretic protein, with the greatest reduction being seen in ischemic tissue. Both NFkappaB50 and NFkappaB65 increased in ischemic tissue, but only NFkappaB50 in non-ischemic samples.CONCLUSIONS: Changes in localization of the factors and altered levels ofcytokine and nitric oxide synthase indicate that the heart switches to a"protective and repair" mode, and mechanical unloading allows this transition to occur. Observed changes were dependent on the etiology of the disease.