: 24661452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]216. Artif Organs. 2014 Dec;38(12):1029-34. doi: 10.1111/aor.12292. Epub 2014 Mar 24.Derivation of indices of left ventricular contractility in the setting ofcontinuous-flow left ventricular assist device support.Gupta S(1), Muthiah K, Woldendorp K, Robson D, Jansz P, Hayward CS.Author information: (1)Heart Failure and Transplant Unit, St. Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, New SouthWales, Australia; Faculty of Medicine, The University of New South Wales, Sydney,New South Wales, Australia.It is important to accurately monitor residual cardiac function in patients underlong-term continuous-flow left ventricular assist device (cfLVAD) support. Twonew measures of left ventricular (LV) chamber contractility in thecfLVAD-unloaded ventricle include IQ, a regression coefficient between maximumflow acceleration and flow pulsatility at different pump speeds; and K, alogarithmic relationship between volumes moved in systole and diastole. We soughtto optimize these indices. We also propose RIQ, a ratio between maximum flowacceleration and flow pulsatility at baseline pump speed, as an alternative toIQ. Eleven patients (mean age 49 ± 11 years) were studied. The K index wasderived at baseline pump speed by defining systolic and diastolic onset as timepoints at which maximum and minimum volumes move through the pump. IQ across the full range of pump speeds was markedly different between patients. It wasunreliable in three patients with underlying atrial fibrillation (coefficient of determination R(2) range: 0.38-0.74) and also when calculated without pump speed manipulation (R(2) range: 0.01-0.74). The K index was within physiologicalranges, but poorly correlated to both IQ (P = 0.42) and RIQ (P = 0.92). In fourpatients there was excellent correspondence between RIQ and IQ, while four other patients showed a poor relationship between these indices. As RIQ does notrequire pump speed changes, it may be a more clinically appropriate measure.Further studies are required to determine the validity of these indices.Copyright © 2014 International Center for Artificial Organs and Transplantationand Wiley Periodicals, Inc.