: 3302168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2159. Tex Heart Inst J. 1986 Mar;13(1):13-8.Cardiac transplantation in a patient with septicemia after prolonged intraaortic balloon pump support: implications for staged transplantation.Frazier OH(1), Cooley DA, Okereke OU, Radovancević B, Chandler LB.Author information: (1)Transplantation Unit and Division of Surgery, Texas Heart Institute, Houston, Texas 77225, USA.After initial support with an intraaortic balloon pump, and since theintroduction of cyclosporine for immunosuppression, five patients have undergone cardiac transplantation in our institution with good results. Not one of thesepatients died of sepsis in the immediate postoperative period. We report theclinical course of one such patient to show the advantage of cyclosporineimmunosuppression and the value of circulatory support devices in patientsawaiting suitable cardiac donors. A 22-year-old mother of two children wastransferred to our institution with progressive cardiac failure. An intraaorticballoon (IABP) was inserted after she had become hypotensive, obtunded andacidotic, with severe congestive heart failure. However, she failed to improveand we performed a cardiac transplantation. After major problems withinfections-a leading cause of death among cardiac transplant recipients-andepisodes of convulsions that were controlled with Dilantin, along with othercomplications, she slowly but progressively improved and was discharged 7 weekspost-transplantation. She had one episode of allograft rejection, which wasreversed with a short course of Solu Medrol. She is alive and well 18 monthspost-transplantation. In conclusion, cardiac transplantation in patients withsepsis can be expected to have a favorable outcome if cyclosporine is used forimmunosuppression. When IABP or any other circulatory assist device is used as a bridge to cardiac transplantation, it is still possible to control infection insuch patients, especially when cyclosporine is used as the majorimmunosuppressive.PMCID: PMC324593