: 16153916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1447. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005 Sep;130(3):624-32.Gene transfection with human hepatocyte growth factor complementary DNA plasmids attenuates cardiac remodeling after acute myocardial infarction in goat heartsimplanted with ventricular assist devices.Shirakawa Y(1), Sawa Y, Takewa Y, Tatsumi E, Kaneda Y, Taenaka Y, Matsuda H.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, E1, Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, OsakaUniversity Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.BACKGROUND: Although a left ventricular assist device is often used to providecirculatory support until transplantation in severe heart failure, the mortality of long-term use of left ventricular assist devices remains high. We have shownthat hepatocyte growth factor causes angiogenesis, antifibrosis, andantiapoptosis in the myocardium. Therefore, gene therapy with hepatocyte growthfactor-complementary DNA plasmids may enhance the chance of "bridge to recovery."In this study, we performed gene therapy with hepatocyte growth factor in theimpaired goat heart with a left ventricular assist device.METHODS: Cardiac impairment was induced in 6 adult goats (56-65 kg) by ligationof the coronary artery, and ventricular assist devices were installed. Thehepatocyte growth factor group (HGF; n = 3) was administered human hepatocytegrowth factor-complementary DNA plasmid (2.0 mg) in the myocardium. The controlgroup (n = 3) was similarly administered beta-galactosidase plasmid. Four weeksafter gene transfection, we attempted to wean all goats from the ventricularassist device.RESULTS: The myocardia transfected with human hepatocyte growthfactor-complementary DNA contained human hepatocyte growth factor protein atlevels as high as 1.0 +/- 0.3 ng/g tissue 3 days after transfection. Afterweaning from the ventricular assist device, the HGF group showed goodhemodynamics, whereas the control group showed deterioration. The percentage offractional shortening was significantly higher in the HGF group than the control group (HGF vs control, 37.9% +/- 1.7% vs 26.4% +/- 0.3%, respectively; P < .01). Left ventricular dilatation associated with myocyte hypertrophy and fibroticchanges was detected in the control group but not in the HGF group. Vasculardensity was markedly increased in the HGF group.CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that gene therapy with human hepatocyte growthfactor may enhance the chance of bridge to recovery in the impaired heartsupported with a ventricular assist device.