: 24574450  [PubMed - in process]241. Methods Inf Med. 2014;53(2):121-36. doi: 10.3414/ME13-01-0047. Epub 2014 Feb 27.A decision support system for the treatment of patients with ventricular assistdevice support.Karvounis EC, Tsipouras MG, Tzallas AT, Katertsidis NS, Stefanou K, Goletsis Y,Frigerio M, Verde A, Caruso R, Meyns B, Terrovitis J, Trivella MG, FotiadisDI(1).Author information: (1)Dimitrios I. Fotiadis, Unit of Medical Technology and Intelligent Information Systems, Dept. of Material Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, POBox 1186, 451 10 Ioannina, Greece, E-mail: fotiadis@cc.uoi.gr.BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) is affecting millions of people every year and it is characterized by impaired ventricular performance, exercise intolerance andshortened life expectancy. Despite significant advancements in drug therapy,mortality of the disease remains excessively high, as heart transplant remainsthe gold standard treatment for end-stage HF when no contraindications subsist.Traditionally, implanted Ventricular Assist Devices (VADs) have been employed in order to provide circulatory support to patients who cannot survive the waitingtime to transplantation, reducing the workload imposed on the heart. In manycases that process could recover its contractility performance.OBJECTIVES: The SensorART platform focuses on the management and remote treatmentof patients suffering from HF. It provides an interoperable, extendable andVAD-independent solution, which incorporates various hardware and softwarecomponents in a holistic approach, in order to improve the quality of thepatients' treatment and the workflow of the specialists. This paper focuses onthe description and analysis of Specialist's Decision Support System (SDSS), aninnovative component of the SensorART platform.METHODS: The SDSS is a Web-based tool that assists specialists on designing thetherapy plan for their patients before and after VAD implantation, analyzingpatients' data, extracting new knowledge, and making informative decisions.RESULTS: SDSS offers support to medical and VAD experts through the differentphases of VAD therapy, incorporating several tools covering all related fields;Statistics, Association Rules, Monitoring, Treatment, Weaning, Speed and Suction Detection.CONCLUSIONS: SDSS and its modules have been tested in a number of patients andthe results are encouraging.