: 24530103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]251. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Mar 15;172(2):318-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.01.098. Epub2014 Jan 24.Counterpulsation: a concept with a remarkable past, an established present and a challenging future.Kapelios CJ(1), Terrovitis JV(1), Siskas P(1), Kontogiannis C(1), Repasos E(1),Nanas JN(2).Author information: (1)3rd Department of Cardiology, University of Athens School of Medicine, Greece.(2)3rd Department of Cardiology, University of Athens School of Medicine, Greece.Electronic address: jnanas@ath.forthnet.gr.The intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), which is the main representative of thecounterpulsation technique, has been an invaluable tool in cardiologists' andcardiac surgeons' armamentarium for approximately half a century. The IABPconfers a wide variety of vaguely understood effects on cardiac physiology andmechano-energetics. Although, the recommendations for its use are multiple, most are not substantially evidence-based. Indicatively, the results of recentlyperformed prospective studies have put IABP's utility in the setting ofpost-infarction cardiogenic shock into question. However, the particular issueremains open to further research. IABP support in high-risk patients undergoingPCI is associated with favorable long-term clinical outcome. In cardiac surgery, the use of IABP in cases of peri-operative low-output syndrome, refractory anginaor ischemia-related mechanical complications is a usual, but poorly justifiedstrategy. Anecdotal cases of treatment of incessant ventricular arrhythmias,reversal of right ventricular dysfunction and partial myocardial recovery havealso been reported with its use. Converging data demonstrate the potential ofsafe long-term IABP support as a bridge to decision making or a bridge totransplantation modality in patients with heart failure. The feasibility of IABP insertion via other than the femoral artery sites enhances this potential.Despite the fact that several other counterpulsation devices have been developed and tested overtime none has managed to substitute the IABP, which continues tobe most frequently used mechanical assist device.Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.