: 24060499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]346. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Jan;33(1):71-9. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.08.013. Epub 2013 Sep 19.Platelet glycoprotein Ibα ectodomain shedding and non-surgical bleeding in heart failure patients supported by continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices.Hu J(1), Mondal NK(1), Sorensen EN(2), Cai L(3), Fang HB(3), Griffith BP(1), WuZJ(4).Author information: (1)Artificial Organs Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of Maryland,School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Clinical Engineering,University of Maryland, Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Department ofEpidemiology and Public Health, University of Maryland School of Medicine,Baltimore, Maryland. (4)Artificial Organs Laboratory, Department of Surgery,University of Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. Electronicaddress: zwu@smail.umaryland.edu.BACKGROUND: Non-surgical bleeding (NSB) is a major complication among heartfailure (HF) patients supported by continuous-flow left ventricular assistdevices (CF-LVADs). Understanding the hemostatic defects contributing to NSBafter CF-LVAD implantation is crucial for prevention of this adverse event. Theaim of this study was to examine the link between platelet glycoprotein Ibα(GPIbα) ectodomain shedding and NSB in CF-LVAD recipients and to identify apotential biomarker of NSB.METHODS: Serial blood samples were collected from 35 HF patients supported withCF-LVADs. Platelet function was evaluated by a platelet function analysis device and thromboelastography (TEG). Platelet GPIbα shedding, von Willebrand factor(vWF) antigen and vWF collagen binding capacity were determined usingenzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). The structural analysis of vWF wasperformed by gel electrophoresis. These platelet function measures with vWFparameters of the patients who had NSB between 4 and 32 days after CF-LVADimplantation (bleeder) were analyzed against those without NSB (non-bleeder).Blood samples from 7 healthy individuals were collected to obtain healthyreference values for the laboratory assays.RESULTS: Elevated GPIbα shedding was found to be a pre-existing condition in all HF patients prior to CF-LVAD implantation. Post-operative level of GPIbα sheddingincreased and remained elevated in the bleeder group, whereas a consistentdecrease was found in the non-bleeder group. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis indicated that the level of GPIbα shedding had a predictive power of NSB in patients on CF-LVAD support.CONCLUSIONS: Platelet GPIbα ectodomain shedding which attenuates plateletreactivity is associated with NSB. Plasma GPIbα level may potentially be used to refine bleeding risk stratification in CF-LVAD patients.Copyright © 2014 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC3947169