: 24418735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]273. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Jan;33(1):80-7. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.11.010. Epub 2013 Dec 1.Ambient hemolysis and activation of coagulation is different between HeartMate IIand HeartWare left ventricular assist devices.Birschmann I(1), Dittrich M(2), Eller T(3), Wiegmann B(4), Reininger AJ(5), BuddeU(6), Strüber M(7).Author information: (1)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:ibirschmann@hdz-nrw.de. (2)Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University ofWuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. (3)Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin, JohannesWesling Klinikum Minden, Minden, Germany. (4)Department for Cardiothoracic-,Transplantation- and Vascular Surgery, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,Germany. (5)Baxter Innovations GmbH, Vienna, Austria. (6)Hämostaseologie, MedilysLaborgesellschaft mbH, Asklepios Klinik Altona, Hamburg, Germany. (7)Heart CenterLeipzig, Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.BACKGROUND: Thromboembolic and bleeding events in patients with a leftventricular assist device (LVAD) are still a major cause of complications.Therefore, the balance between anti-coagulant and pro-coagulant factors needs to be tightly controlled. The principle hypothesis of this study is that differentpump designs may have an effect on hemolysis and activation of the coagulationsystem. Referring to this, the HeartMate II (HMII; Thoratec Corp, Pleasanton, CA)and the HeartWare HVAD (HeartWare International Inc, Framingham, MA) wereinvestigated.METHODS: For 20 patients with LVAD support (n = 10 each), plasma coagulation,full blood count, and clinical chemistry parameters were measured. Plateletfunction was monitored using platelet aggregometry, platelet functionanalyzer-100 system ( Siemens, Marburg, Germany), vasodilator-stimulatedphosphoprotein phosphorylation assay, immature platelet fraction,platelet-derived microparticles, and von Willebrand diagnostic.RESULTS: Acquired von Willebrand syndrome could be detected in all patients.Signs of hemolysis, as measured by lactate dehydrogenase levels (mean, 470U/liter HMII, 250 U/liter HVAD; p < 0.001), were more pronounced in the HMIIpatients. In contrast, D-dimer analysis indicated a significantly higheractivation of the coagulation system in HVAD patients (mean, 0.94 mg/liter HMII, 2.01 mg/liter HVAD; p < 0.01). The efficacy of anti-platelet therapy usingclopidogrel was not sufficient in more than 50% of the patients.CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the finding that all patients with rotary blood pumps suffered from von Willebrand syndrome. In addition, a distinct footprint ofeffects on hemolysis and the coagulation system can be attributed to differentdevices. As a consequence, the individual status of the coagulation system needs to be controlled in long-term patients.© 2013 Published by International Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation on behalf of International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.