: 19577084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1080. Tex Heart Inst J. 2009;36(3):214-9.Use of ventricular assist device as a bridge to cardiac transplantation: impactof age and other determinants on outcomes.Kwon MH(1), Moriguchi JD, Ardehali A, Jocson R, Marelli D, Laks H, Shemin RJ,Esmailian F.Author information: (1)Divisions of Cardiothoracic Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. mkwon@mednet.ucla.eduWe sought to compare outcomes in patients > or = 60 years of age with those oftheir younger counterparts who underwent ventricular assist device implantationintended as a bridge to cardiac transplantation and also to identifyretrospectively additional pre- and postoperative factors that might portendadverse outcomes.The medical records of 88 patients who were treated withbridge-to-transplantation ventricular assist devices from 1996 through 2007 were reviewed. Laboratory values, hemodynamic parameters, and the need for hemodynamicsupport were evaluated. Postoperative complications and bridge-to-transplantationsuccess rates versus death rates were evaluated. Seventeen patients were > or =60 years old and 71 patients were < 60 years old. In the older group, 59% ofpatients underwent successful bridging to transplantation, compared with 69% ofthe younger patients (P = 0.41). Multivariate analysis distinguished age > or =60, female sex, earlier time period of operation, higher mean pulmonary arterial and central venous pressures, need for preoperative intra-aortic balloon pumps,and postoperative respiratory failure as independent risk factors for death.After orthotopic heart transplantation, survival to hospital discharge was 100%in the older group and 93.9% in the younger patients. Median lengths of stay weresimilar in both age categories.Multivariate analysis identified age as 1 of 6independent risk factors for death in this study. Patients who successfullyunderwent cardiac transplantation, however, had similar survival statisticsregardless of age category. Case-by-case evaluation is warranted when analyzingrisk-benefit ratios of bridge-to-transplantation ventricular assist devicetherapy in the older patient population.PMCID: PMC2696504