: 20642766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]929. J Card Surg. 2010 Jul;25(4):484-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2010.01074.x.Transcutaneous energy transmission for mechanical circulatory support systems:history, current status, and future prospects.Slaughter MS(1), Myers TJ.Author information: (1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Louisville,Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA. mark.slaughter@louisville.eduA totally implantable mechanical circulatory support system would be verydesirable for destination therapy. However, implanting all components of apulsatile total artificial heart (TAH) or left ventricular assist device (LVAD)is complex because of the requirement for a continuous electrical power supplyand the need for volume compensation. Implantable compliance chambers weredeveloped for early LVAD designs, and although they functioned properly duringinitial laboratory tests, air loss by diffusion and the development of fibroustissue around the sac eventually rendered them ineffective. Because theseproblems have not yet been overcome, volume displacement LVADs are currentlydesigned with either a direct communication to an external drive console or anatmospheric vent. Transcutaneous energy transmission systems (TETSs) were alsodeveloped, but because the skin was being penetrated for volume compensation, it seemed more efficient to transmit electrical power through wires incorporatedinto the venting apparatus. More recently, TETSs were used clinically for both a pulsatile TAH and LVAD in a small number of patients, but for reasons unrelatedto the TETS, neither of these devices is presently in use. Because the newercontinuous-flow LVADs do not require a compliance chamber, they present apotential future application for TETS technology, because infections of thepercutaneous tube continue to be one of the most important limitations oflong-term circulatory support. A totally implantable LVAD with an incorporatedTETS for destination therapy could become an important advance in the treatmentof end-stage heart failure.