: 17234525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1326. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2007 Jan;26(1):34-40. Epub 2006 Nov 30.Decorin-mediated transforming growth factor-beta inhibition ameliorates adversecardiac remodeling.Jahanyar J(1), Joyce DL, Southard RE, Loebe M, Noon GP, Koerner MM, Torre-Amione G, Youker KA.Author information: (1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,Texas 77030, USA. jahanyar@bcm.tmc.eduBACKGROUND: Implantation of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) has beenshown to induce regression of fibrosis in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) and improve myocardial function. The mechanism of reverse remodeling after mechanical circulatory support (MCS), however, has not been fully characterized. In this study we examined the anti-fibrotic effects of decorin, an extracellular matrix (ECM) proteoglycan, on the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)pathway.METHODS: Human myocardial tissue samples were obtained from patients undergoingLVAD implantation and again following subsequent transplantation after asustained period of MCS. The specimens were examined by utilizing differentmolecular and histologic techniques, including human cardiac fibroblast in vitro studies. We assessed gene expression, mRNA and protein levels.RESULTS: We found a significant decrease in interstitial fibrosis after MCS, witha decrease in collagen mRNA transcription rates, serving as an indirectmeasurement of collagen synthesis. Both the mRNA and protein levels of decorinwere significantly increased after a period of MCS. Decorin mRNA was up-regulatedby 44% after MCS (p < 0.01), which paralleled the increase in interstitialdecorin deposition (p < 0.001). In addition, p-SMAD2, a molecular markerdownstream of the TGF-beta pathway, was found to be inactivated after MCS (p <0.02). Moreover, cultured human cardiac fibroblasts exposed to TGF-betademonstrated decreased collagen production when exogenous decorin was added (p < 0.03).CONCLUSIONS: The decorin molecule is potentially involved in reverse cardiacremodeling, by directly inhibiting the TGF-beta pathway and its pro-fibroticeffects on the failing human heart.