: 16765375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1384. J Card Fail. 2006 Jun;12(5):360-8.Lymphocyte levels of GRK2 (betaARK1) mirror changes in the LVAD-supported failinghuman heart: lower GRK2 associated with improved beta-adrenergic signaling after mechanical unloading.Hata JA(1), Williams ML, Schroder JN, Lima B, Keys JR, Blaxall BC, Petrofski JA, Jakoi A, Milano CA, Koch WJ.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina,USA.BACKGROUND: In human heart failure, increased expression of G protein-coupledreceptor kinases (GRKs) causes the loss of beta-adrenergic receptor (betaAR)signaling and function. Mechanical unloading with a left ventricular assistdevice (LVAD) promotes reverse remodeling, which includes restoration of betaARresponsiveness. We tested the hypothesis that LVAD support of the failing humanheart alters the expression and activity of GRKs and we sought to determinewhether changes in myocardial GRKs could be tracked in lymphocytes.METHODS AND RESULTS: Paired samples of human LV tissue (n = 12) and blood wereobtained at the time of LVAD implantation (heart failure) and subsequent cardiac transplantation (LVAD). betaAR signaling was quantified by receptor density andadenylyl cyclase activity. Immunoblotting and real-time reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction were used to measure GRK2 and GRK5 protein and mRNAlevels. Rhodopsin phosphorylation was used to assess total GRK activity.Consistent with reverse remodeling, betaAR density and signaling were restored tononfailing levels after LVAD support. GRK2 protein levels were significantlyreduced 55% after LVAD support and GRK2 mRNA was similarly reduced. In contrast, GRK5 protein and mRNA levels were unchanged. Total myocardial GRK activity wasreduced similar to the drop in GRK2 expression. In lymphocytes, GRK2 proteinlevels were decreased after LVAD support and there was a significant positivecorrelation between myocardial and lymphocyte GRK2 levels in both heart failureand LVAD samples.CONCLUSION: The changes in myocardial GRK2 expression and activity that aremirrored in lymphocytes provide a possible mechanism for the restoration ofbetaAR signaling and reverse remodeling after mechanical unloading in the failingheart. Moreover, lymphocytes may provide a surrogate marker of myocardial GRK2 inthese patients.