: 21601774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]786. Can J Cardiol. 2011 May-Jun;27(3):319-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2011.03.011.The 2011 Canadian Cardiovascular Society heart failure management guidelinesupdate: focus on sleep apnea, renal dysfunction, mechanical circulatory support, and palliative care.McKelvie RS(1), Moe GW, Cheung A, Costigan J, Ducharme A, Estrella-Holder E,Ezekowitz JA, Floras J, Giannetti N, Grzeslo A, Harkness K, Heckman GA, HowlettJG, Kouz S, Leblanc K, Mann E, O'Meara E, Rajda M, Rao V, Simon J, Swiggum E,Zieroth S, Arnold JM, Ashton T, D'Astous M, Dorian P, Haddad H, Isaac DL, LeblancMH, Liu P, Sussex B, Ross HJ.Author information: (1)Hamilton Health Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.robert.mckelvie@phri.caComment in    Can J Cardiol. 2011 Nov-Dec;27(6):871.e7.The 2011 Canadian Cardiovascular Society Heart Failure (HF) Guidelines FocusedUpdate reviews the recently published clinical trials that will potentiallyimpact on management. Also reviewed is the less studied but clinically important area of sleep apnea. Finally, patients with advanced HF represent a group ofpatients who pose major difficulties to clinicians. Advanced HF therefore isexamined from the perspectives of HF complicated by renal failure, the role ofpalliative care, and the role of mechanical circulatory support (MCS). All ofthese topics are reviewed from a perspective of practical applications. Importantnew studies have demonstrated in less symptomatic HF patients that cardiacresynchronization therapy will be of benefit. As well, aldosterone receptorantagonists can be used with benefit in less symptomatic HF patients. Theimportant role of palliative care and the need to address end-of-life issues inadvanced HF are emphasized. Physicians need to be aware of the possibility ofsleep apnea complicating the course of HF and the role of a sleep study for theproper assessment and management of the conditon. Patients with either acutesevere or chronic advanced HF with otherwise good life expectancy should bereferred to a cardiac centre capable of providing MCS. Furthermore, patientsawaiting heart transplantation who deteriorate or are otherwise not likely tosurvive until a donor organ is found should be referred for MCS.Copyright © 2011 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.