: 16624689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1401. Eur Heart J. 2006 Dec;27(24):2929-38. Epub 2006 Apr 7.Clinical and cost-effectiveness of left ventricular assist devices as a bridge toheart transplantation for people with end-stage heart failure: a systematicreview and economic evaluation.Clegg AJ(1), Scott DA, Loveman E, Colquitt JL, Royle P, Bryant J.Author information: (1)Southampton Health Technology Assessments Centre (SHTAC), Wessex Institute forHealth Research and Development (WIHRD), University of Southampton, SouthamptonSO16 7PX, UK. a.clegg@soton.ac.ukAIMS: To evaluate the clinical and cost-effectiveness of left ventricular (LV)assist devices (LVADs) as a bridge to transplant (BTT) for people with end-stage heart failure (ESHF) through a systematic review and economic evaluation.METHODS AND RESULTS: The systematic review and economic evaluation was conducted according to internationally recognized methods. The search strategy identifiedsystematic reviews, randomized controlled trials, quasi-experimental studies, andobservational studies evaluating the effects of LVADs on survival, functionalcapacity, and quality of life. Cost-effectiveness was assessed through a 5-yeardecision analytic model to estimate the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio ofLVADs compared with usual care. Despite the poor methodological quality of the 18studies included, LVADs appear beneficial improving survival, functional status, and quality of life. Adverse events are a serious concern. The economicevaluation showed that LVADs had a cost per quality adjusted life year of pound65,242 (95% confidence interval pound 34,194-364,564). Sensitivity analysisshowed that post-heart transplant survival gains, pre-heart transplant patientutility, and one-off costs associated with implantation determinecost-effectiveness.CONCLUSION: Although LVADs appear clinically effective as a BTT for people withESHF, it is unlikely that they will be cost-effective unless costs decrease orthe benefits of their use increase.