: 19296762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1113. Arch Surg. 2009 Mar;144(3):241-6. doi: 10.1001/archsurg.2008.559.Pretransplantation patient characteristics and survival following combined heart and kidney transplantation: an analysis of the United Network for Organ SharingDatabase.Russo MJ(1), Rana A, Chen JM, Hong KN, Gelijns A, Moskowitz A, Widmann WD, RatnerL, Naka Y, Hardy MA.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Columbia UniversityCollege of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA.HYPOTHESIS: Pretransplantation patient characteristics determine survivalfollowing combined heart and kidney transplantation (HKT).DESIGN: Time-to-event analysis.SETTING: Academic research.PATIENTS: The United Network for Organ Sharing provided deidentifiedpatient-level data. Analysis included 19,373 heart transplant recipients fromJanuary 1, 1995, to December 31, 2005.MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was performed to identify pretransplantation recipient characteristics associatedwith improved long-term survival following HKT. Kaplan-Meier survival functionsand Cox proportional hazards regression were used for time-to-event analysis.Using the relative risks calculated in regression analysis, weights were assignedfor each risk factor, allowing for the construction of a risk score.RESULTS: Among heart transplant recipients, 264 (1.4%) underwent HKT. Factorsassociated with diminished survival included peripheral vascular disease,recipient age older than 65 years, nonischemic etiology of heart failure,dialysis dependence at the time of transplantation, and bridge to transplantationusing a ventricular assist device. After stratification by risk score, 1-yearsurvival was 93.2% and 61.9% in the lowest- and highest-risk HKT groups,respectively. Further stratification by estimated glomerular filtration rate(eGFR) was performed based on a previous study showing decreased survival ofpatients undergoing orthotopic heart transplantation with a preoperative eGFR of less than 33 mL/min. Low-risk patients with an eGFR of less than 33 mL/minundergoing HKT constituted the only group that had significantly better survival compared with isolated patients undergoing orthotopic heart transplantation with eGFRs and risk scores in the same range (P = .006).CONCLUSIONS: When patients were stratified by risk score and by diminished eGFR(<33 mL/min), low-risk HKT recipients with a diminished eGFR had improvedsurvival following HKT over isolated heart transplant recipients. Only low-riskpatients with combined kidney failure (eGFR, <33 mL/min) and heart failure seemto gain a survival benefit from HKT.