: 20706140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]924. J Card Surg. 2010 Sep;25(5):601-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2010.01098.x.Management of prosthetic valves during ventricular assist device implantation.Liu T(1), Jessup M, Acker M, Morris R.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hospital of the University ofPennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.BACKGROUND: An increasing number of patients requiring ventricular assist devices(VAD) have had previous valvular corrections, including valve repair and valvereplacement with mechanical or bioprosthetic valves. The operative andperi-operative management of these patients has been varied.METHODS: A retrospective study of VADs between January 1994 and June 2008revealed 10 patients with previous prosthetic valves requiring management during and after VAD placement. Three patients were supported postcardiotomy after valvesurgery. Two patients were supported due to cardiogenic shock postoperatively.Four patients were supported as a bridge to transplantation. One patient wassupported as a destination therapy (DT).RESULTS: The mitral, valve was left untreated during VAD implantation regardless of valve repair or replacement. For aortic valves, the mechanical aortic valvewas replaced with tissue valve in two patients and left untreated in one case.One patient had tricuspid valve repair previously and was left untouched. Allpatients with prosthetic valves in aortic, mitral and tricuspid position duringVAD support received anticoagulation therapy. There were four deaths, and fourwent on to transplantation. One patient was weaned from VAD and discharged fromthe hospital. One patient received HeartMate I as DT. The most common causes ofdeath were multisystem organ failure (MSOF) and sepsis. One patient had athromboembolic event.CONCLUSIONS: The survival rate of 60% is encouraging when compared to overallsurvival rates. The most common cause of death was MSOF. Patients with prostheticvalves may be safely managed during VAD support.© 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.