: 21740909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]767. Ann Biomed Eng. 2011 Sep;39(9):2313-28. doi: 10.1007/s10439-011-0348-8. Epub 2011Jul 8.Biventricular assist devices: a technical review.Gregory SD(1), Timms D, Gaddum N, Mason DG, Fraser JF.Author information: (1)School of Engineering Systems and Medical Device Domain, Institute of Healthand Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD4001, Australia. shaun.gregory@qut.edu.auThe optimal treatment option for end stage heart failure is transplantation;however, the shortage of donor organs necessitates alternative treatmentstrategies such as mechanical circulatory assistance. Ventricular assist devices (VADs) are employed to support these cases while awaiting cardiac recovery ortransplantation, or in some cases as destination therapy. While left ventricular assist device (LVAD) therapy alone is effective in many instances, up to 50% ofLVAD recipients demonstrate clinically significant postoperative rightventricular failure and potentially need a biventricular assist device (BiVAD).In these cases, the BiVAD can effectively support both sides of the failingheart. This article presents a technical review of BiVADs, both clinicallyapplied and under development. The BiVADs which have been used clinically arepredominantly first generation, pulsatile, and paracorporeal systems that arebulky and prone to device failure, thrombus formation, and infection. While they have saved many lives, they generally necessitate a large external pneumaticdriver which inhibits normal movement and quality of life for many patients. Inan attempt to alleviate these issues, several smaller, implantable second andthird generation devices that use either immersed mechanical blood bearings orhydrodynamic/magnetic levitation systems to support a rotating impeller are underdevelopment or in the early stages of clinical use. Although these rotary devicesmay offer a longer term, completely implantable option for patients withbiventricular failure, their control strategies need to be refined to competewith the inherent volume balancing ability of the first generation devices. TheBiVAD systems potentially offer an improved quality of life to patients withtotal heart failure, and thus a viable alternative to heart transplantation isanticipated with continued development.