: 9237585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1921. Ann Surg. 1997 Jun;225(6):695-704; discussion 705-6.Ventricular assist devices as a bridge to cardiac transplantation. A prelude todestination therapy.Holman WL(1), Bourge RC, Spruell RD, Murrah CP, McGiffin DC, Kirklin JK.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, USA.OBJECTIVE AND BACKGROUND: Ventricular assist devices (VADs) have been used fortemporary circulatory support pending transplantation or recovery of the nativeheart. Outcome in 38 patients treated at the authors' institution with VADspending transplantation was analyzed to provide information relevant to thefuture use of VADs as permanent implants.METHODS: Thoratec (Thoratec Laboratories, Pleasanton, CA) or HeartMate (ThermoCardiosystems, Woburn, MA) VADs were used in all cases. Patients were considered for VAD placement if they were candidates for cardiac transplantation andfulfilled the criteria for the Food and Drug Administration investigationalDevice Exemption trials. The following adverse events were included in theanalysis; death during VAD support, device malfunction, bleeding, neurologicevents, support-related events that preclude transplantation, and device-related infections. Patient survival and complication rates were quantified using theKaplan-Meier method, competing risk analysis, and hazard functions.RESULTS: Nineteen patients had transplantation. Three patients had VAD removalafter cardiac recovery and 16 died without transplantation. The duration of VADsupport ranged from 0 to 279 days. The hazard function for death during VADsupport had an early phase that lasted for 2 weeks after VAD placement, and earlydeath was related to the preimplant condition of the patient. Device-relatedinfections were noted in 11 patients. Seven of these patients had transplantationafter clearing the infection, whereas four died without transplantation.Neurologic events occurred in seven patients. There were no device malfunctionsthat led to patient death.CONCLUSIONS: The absence of fatal device malfunctions suggests that longer termsupport with current VAD designs is feasible. Appropriate patient selection,infection control, and avoidance of thromboembolic neurologic complications will be crucial to the success of permanent VAD use.PMCID: PMC1190872