: 21211994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]868. Ann Pharmacother. 2011 Jan;45(1):60-77. doi: 10.1345/aph.1P459. Epub 2011 Jan 4.Pharmacotherapy for mechanical circulatory support: a comprehensive review.Ensor CR(1), Paciullo CA, Cahoon WD Jr, Nolan PE Jr.Author information: (1)School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.censor1@jhmi.eduOBJECTIVE: To provide a comprehensive review of the pharmacotherapy associatedwith the provision of mechanical circulatory support (MCS) to patients withend-stage heart failure and guidance regarding the selection, assessment, andoptimization of drug therapy for this population.DATA SOURCES: The MEDLINE/PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases were searchedfrom 1960 to July 2010 for articles published in English using the search termsmechanical circulatory support, ventricular assist system, ventricular assistdevice, left ventricular assist device, right ventricular assist device,biventricular assist device, total artificial heart, pulsatile, positivedisplacement, axial, centrifugal, hemostasis, bleeding, hemodynamic, bloodpressure, thrombosis, antithrombotic therapy, anticoagulant, antiplatelet, right ventricular failure, ventricular arrhythmia, anemia, arteriovenous malformation, stroke, infection, and clinical pharmacist.STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All relevant original studies,meta-analyses, systematic reviews, guidelines, and reviews were assessed forinclusion. References from pertinent articles were examined for content not foundduring the initial search.DATA SYNTHESIS: MCS has advanced significantly since the first left ventricularassist device was implanted in 1966. Further advancements in MCS technology that occurred in the latter decade are changing the overall management of endstageheart failure care and cardiac transplantation. These pumps allow for improvedbridge-to-transplant rates, enhanced survival, and quality of life.Pharmacotherapy associated with MCS devices may optimize the performance of thepumps and improve patient outcomes, as well as minimize morbidity related totheir adverse effects. This review highlights the knowledge needed to provideappropriate clinical pharmacy services for patients supported by MCS devices.CONCLUSIONS: The HeartMate II clinical investigators called for the involvementof pharmacists in MCS patient assessment and optimization. Pharmacotherapeuticmanagement of patients supported with MCS devices requires individualized care,with pharmacists as part of the team, based on the characteristics of each pumpand recipient.