: 24565328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]245. Can J Cardiol. 2014 Mar;30(3):296-303. doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2013.12.017. Epub 2013Dec 30.Destination therapy with left ventricular assist devices: for whom and when?Porepa LF(1), Starling RC(2).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kaufman Center for Heart Failure Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. (2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kaufman Center for Heart Failure Heart and VascularInstitute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. Electronic address:STARLIR@ccf.org.Historically, cardiac transplantation is the only definitive therapy formortality reduction, symptom reduction, and improved quality of life in advanced heart failure. Because of improvement in cardiovascular care there is now agrowing number of patients such as the elderly and those with abundantcomorbidity who are not eligible for cardiac transplant. Durable mechanicalcirculatory support is the new reality in the treatment of advanced heart failurein this population subset. The left ventricular assist device (LVAD) has evolved from humble origins as a short-term extracorporeal and pulsatile device into adurable intracorporeal continuous flow device capable of providing permanentsupport in the form of destination therapy (DT) LVAD. Data gathered from originallandmark clinical trials including Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistancefor the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH), and the Heart Mate IITrial, and the Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support(INTERMACS) provide insight into the type of patient and the timing in which toconsider DT LVAD therapy. There are a number individual patient warning signs andsymptoms that predate clinical decline; thus, identifying individuals who mightbenefit from a DT LVAD strategy. The adverse event burden that accompanies DTLVAD therapy cannot be ignored when considering LVAD as an adjunct to ongoingmedical therapy. Trends in patient selection regarding mechanical circulatorysupport continue to evolve along with the technology. As more clinical outcomedata are gathered we will continue to refine our patient selection criteria andtiming of implant.Copyright © 2014 Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.