: 10475471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1839. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999 Aug;68(2):742-9.Cardiac recovery in dilated cardiomyopathy by unloading with a left ventricularassist device.Hetzer R(1), Müller J, Weng Y, Wallukat G, Spiegelsberger S, Loebe M.Author information: (1)Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin and Max-Delbrück Center, Germany.BACKGROUND: Lasting recovery from intractable end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy,which occurs with ventricular unloading, has recently been demonstrated in 5patients. Here our extended clinical experience with the "weaning" concept ispresented.METHODS: In 19 patients (23 to 65 years) with intractable end-stage dilatedcardiomyopathy, ventricular assist devices were explanted after support periodsof up to 26 months, when repeat off-pump studies had shown either restoration of cardiac function (left ventricular ejection fraction, > 45%) and dimensions (leftventricular internal diameter in diastole, < 55 mm) or partial recovery (leftventricular ejection fraction between 35% and 40%) with serious complications on the device. At the time of device placement left ventricular ejection fractionwas below 20% and left ventricular internal diameter in diastole more than 64 mm and bridge-to-transplantation had been planned.RESULTS: Seven patients with persistently restored cardiac function for more than8 months and 5 patients for less than 5 months after weaning were studied. Fivepatients with recurrent heart failure died within 4 to 8 months afterexplantation. Four patients had to be transplanted and 2 died for reasonsunrelated to cardiac function. An individual optimal left ventricular ejectionfraction and left ventricular internal diameter in diastole was reached beforepump removal was actually conducted in all patients. These parameters graduallydeteriorated until pump removal.CONCLUSIONS: Lasting recovery can be reached by ventricular unloading in a subsetof patients with intractable end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy. Obviously, thereis an individual optimum of recovery that cannot be further improved by prolongedunloading.