: 17027024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1352. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2003 Feb;16(1):33-43.Ventricular assist devices.Collard E(1), Van Dyck MJ, Jacquet LM.Author information: (1)Department of Anaesthesiology, Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium.collard@anes.ucl.ac.bePURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recent advances in technology as well as new indications forimplantation have appeared in the field of ventricular assist devices. Progresshas also been made in the understanding of the underlying mechanisms ofmyocardial recovery after ventricular assist device support.RECENT FINDINGS: Technological progress includes the development of fullyimplantable pulsatile and continuous flow pumps, either axial flow orcentrifugal, for left ventricular and total heart assistance. Among the newindications for ventricular assist device support, the most important is the use of the device as permanent treatment for end-stage cardiac failure patients.Increased knowledge has been acquired regarding the effects of mechanicalassistance and of unloading of the heart on haemodynamics, as well as on thecellular, molecular and electrophysiological characteristics of the failingheart. All these findings suggest that depressed myocardial function cansometimes recover with ventricular assist device therapy. Ventricular assistdevice support, however, still carries a high rate of complications: the deviceitself can fail, bleeding and thromboembolism are common, immunity is disturbedand the incidence of infection remains high.SUMMARY: In patients with end-stage heart failure, ventricular assist devices canbe used as a bridge to transplantation or to recovery, but they are now alsoconsidered as a long-term myocardial replacement therapy. Which device is themost appropriate for each indication, however, remains to be defined. Even if theunderlying mechanisms of myocardial recovery are progressively clarified, the useof ventricular assist devices as a bridge to recovery still has limited clinical success. Clinical trials with the fully implantable devices are in their earlystages, but these pumps appear promising in terms of efficacy, reliability andcomplication rate, as well as being easy to implant. Because more patients willbenefit from ventricular assist device placement in the future,anaesthesiologists must be prepared to manage patients undergoing ventricularassist device placement or presenting for noncardiac surgery while underventricular assist device support.