: 17761592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1263. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2007 Aug;9(4):318-31.Managing drugs and devices in patients with permanent ventricular assist devices.Cadeiras M(1), von Bayern M, Deng MC.Author information: (1)Cardiac Transplantation Research, Division of Cardiology, Department ofMedicine, Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons, New YorkPresbyterian Hospital, PH Room 1291, 622 W. 168th Street, New York, NY 10032,USA.Patients will be considered for destination mechanical circulatory support device(MCSD) implantation when all other organ-saving treatment options have failed andthey are not eligible for heart transplantation. Current medical evidencesuggests that only for those patients who are inotrope-dependent and thereforelikely have a 1-year survival probability without MCSD implantation of less than 50%, MCSD intervention will add to survival and quality-of-life benefit. Suitablecandidates for MCSD are those patients who have a high risk of dying from heartfailure but acceptable noncardiac risk. Evaluation of patients for MCSD requires a systematic and critical review of all organ systems and of the psychosocialsituation. Specifically, right ventricular function and risk of right ventricularfailure should be evaluated before planning destination MCSD implantation.Treatment will focus on prompt recovery from MCSD implantation, maintainingoptimal treatment for heart failure, and preventing/treating MCSD complications, including infection, bleeding, coagulopathy, right heart failure, and devicedysfunction. MCSD programs should be organized as an advanced heart failurecenter directed by specialized heart failure cardiologists, surgeons expert atimplant and management of MCSD, specialized nurses, social workers,psychologists, financial experts, and physical therapists. MCSD practice is basedon a patient-centered theory, with an appropriate understanding of the respectiveroles of the physician and the patient during their iterative encounters in whichthe patient is an autonomous person making responsible personal health decisions while the health care team is providing continued expert and empathic counseling about various options, based on systematic outcomes research (eg, byparticipation in the Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted CirculatorySupport - MCSD database ).