: 12537085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1657. Transplantation. 2002 Dec 27;74(12):1735-46.Initial experience with the modified extracorporeal liver-assist device forpatients with fulminant hepatic failure: system modifications and clinicalimpact.Millis JM(1), Cronin DC, Johnson R, Conjeevaram H, Conlin C, Trevino S, MaguireP.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.BACKGROUND: The need to find a safe, effective liver support system for patients with fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) continues to be unmet. A system usingimmortalized human hepatocytes was originally developed in the early 1990s. Amodified version of the initial extracorporeal liver-assist device (ELAD) wasrecently placed into an initial clinical trial at the University of Chicago. The goal of this study was to determine the safety profile of the device at onecenter before broadening the study to other sites.METHODS: Patients who were diagnosed with FHF and admitted to the University ofChicago were eligible for the ELAD study. Informed consent was obtained, andpatients received continuous ELAD therapy until and throughout transplantation.Data were prospectively collected and subsequently analyzed.RESULTS: Five patients were treated with the device. All patients successfullyunderwent transplantation. Four of the five patients survived to the 30-dayendpoint of the study. There were no biomechanical problems identified. Thepatients' hemodynamic conditions did not deteriorate during treatment. The adult patients' clinical courses appeared to stabilize while connected to the ELAD(mean arterial pressure range 80-97, mean 88.6; cerebral perfusion pressure range62-88, mean 76.5). Patient 4 experienced remarkable improvement during ELADtherapy: elimination of phenylephrine, reduction of dopamine from 20 microg/minto 5 microg/min, and reduction of respiratory support from 100% O2, 10 cmpositive end-expiratory pressure to 60% O2, and 5 cm H2O positive end-expiratory pressure. The device continued to be metabolically active throughout the studyperiod as documented by oxygen use (mean O2 change from sampling port beforecartridge to sampling port after cartridge for all patients treated = 55 mm Hg).CONCLUSIONS: The patients tolerated treatment with the ELAD well. There were nounanticipated safety issues. The cells in the cartridges were metabolicallyactive. All patients successfully underwent transplantation. The results fromthis single-institution experience indicates that larger randomized multicentertrials should proceed.