: 15745293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1482. ASAIO J. 2005 Jan-Feb;51(1):116-20.Heterotopic transplantation of the failing rat heart as a model of leftventricular mechanical unloading toward recovery.Tsuneyoshi H(1), Oriyanhan W, Kanemitsu H, Shiina R, Nishina T, Ikeda T,Nishimura K, Komeda M.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, KyotoUniversity, 54 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.The left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is usually used in patients withend-stage heart failure as a bridge to transplantation. Recently, some studieshave reported functional recovery with the use of an LVAD, although themechanisms responsible for recovery are not fully understood. We investigated thefunctional recovery of the infarcted, failing rat heart in response to mechanicalunloading after heterotopic transplantation. Heart failure was induced in Lewisrats by ligating the left anterior descending artery. After 4 weeks, theinfarcted hearts were harvested and heterotopically transplanted. Thetransplanted infarcted heart was removed after 2 weeks of unloading and examined for hypertrophy and fibrosis, as well as for mRNA levels encoding for brainnatriuretic peptide, sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase2a (SERCA2a), and beta1- and beta2-adrenergic receptors. Normal and infarcted rats withouttransplantation served as control animals. The infarcted heart was hypertrophied as evidenced by an increase in heart weight and myocyte diameter. After unloadingthe infarcted heart for 2 weeks, there was a decrease in heart weight and myocytediameter. However, the percentage of myocardial fibrosis increased afterunloading. The mRNA expression of brain natriuretic peptide and thebeta2-adrenergic receptor significantly improved after mechanical unloading. The levels of SERCA2a mRNA tended to increase after unloading. In conclusion,unloading the failing, infarcted heart can help normalize left ventricularhypertrophy and cardiac gene expression. This unloading model appears topartially mimic the conditions of hemodynamic support with an LVAD in heartfailure patients and potentially offers insights into the mechanisms offunctional recovery.