: 22651840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]621. ASAIO J. 2012 Jul-Aug;58(4):353-62. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e318256bb50.Control strategies for afterload reduction with an artificial vasculature device.Giridharan GA(1), Cheng RC, Glower JS, Ewert DL, Sobieski MA, Slaughter MS,Koenig SC.Author information: (1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.Ventricular assist devices (VADs) have been used successfully as a bridge totransplant in heart failure patients by unloading ventricular volume andrestoring the circulation. An artificial vasculature device (AVD) is beingdeveloped that may better facilitate myocardial recovery than VAD by controlling the afterload experienced by the native heart and controlling the pulsatileenergy entering into the arterial system from the device, potentiallyreconditioning the arterial system properties. The AVD is a valveless, 80 mlblood chamber with a servo-controlled pusher plate connected to the ascendingaorta by a vascular graft. Control algorithms for the AVD were developed tomaintain any user-defined systemic input impedance (IM) including resistance,elastance, and inertial components. Computer simulation and mock circulationmodels of the cardiovascular system were used to test the efficacy of two controlstrategies for the AVD: 1) average impedance position control (AIPC)-to maintain an average value of resistance during left ventricular (LV) systole and 2)instantaneous impedance force feedback (IIFF) and position control (IIPC)-tomaintain a desired value or profile of resistance and compliance. Computersimulations and mock loop tests were performed to predict resultingcardiovascular pressures, volumes, flows, and the resistance and complianceexperienced by the native LV during ejection for simulated normal, failing, andrecovering LV. These results indicate that the LV volume and pressure decreased, and the LV stroke volume increased with decreasing IM, resulting in an increased ejection fraction. Although the AIPC algorithm is more stable and can toleratehigher levels of sensor errors and noise, the IIFF and IIPC control algorithmsare better suited to maintain any instantaneous IM or an IM profile. Thedeveloped AVD impedance control algorithms may be implemented with current VADsto promote myocardial recovery and facilitate weaning.