: 20811791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]920. Circ Heart Fail. 2010 Nov;3(6):682-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.109.918672.Epub 2010 Aug 31.Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support(INTERMACS)-defined morbidity and mortality associated with pediatric ventricularassist device support at a single US center: the Stanford experience.Stein ML(1), Robbins R, Sabati AA, Reinhartz O, Chin C, Liu E, Bernstein D, Roth S, Wright G, Reitz B, Rosenthal D.Author information: (1)Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.BACKGROUND: The use of ventricular assist devices (VADs) to bridge pediatricpatients to heart transplantation has increased dramatically over the last 15years. In this report, we present the largest US single-center report ofpediatric VAD use to date. We present detailed descriptions of morbidity andmortality associated with VAD support, using standard Interagency Registry forMechanically Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) criteria for pediatrics to facilitate the comparison of these results to other studies.METHODS AND RESULTS: We retrospectively identified 25 patients younger than 18years with 27 episodes of mechanical circulatory support using VADs as bridge to heart transplantation from January 1998 to December 2007. Survival to transplant for the entire cohort was 74%. The most common major morbidities, as defined byINTERMACS criteria for a pediatric population, were respiratory failure, majorlocalized infections, major bleeding events, hepatic dysfunction, and right heartfailure. Major neurological events occurred in 48% of the study population. Themedian time to the first occurrence of an adverse event was less than 14 days forrespiratory failure, right heart failure, major localized infection, and majorbleeding. Patients who died before transplantation had significantly more adverseevents per day of support than did those who were successfully transplanted.Episodes of major bleeding, tamponade, acute renal failure, respiratory failure, and right heart failure were all associated with increased risk of mortality.CONCLUSIONS: INTERMACS criteria can be successfully used to analyze pediatric VADoutcomes. These data serve as a baseline for future studies of VAD support inchildren and indicate good survival rates but considerable morbidity.