: 15776348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1481. Tex Heart Inst J. 2004;31(4):404-8.End-stage heart failure with multiple intracardiac thrombi: a rescue strategy.Posch MG(1), Thompson LO, Koerner MM, Akay MH, Noon GP, Loebe M.Author information: (1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Division of Transplant Surgery andAssist Devices, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.The use of ventricular assist devices as a bridge to transplantation has become awidely used option for patients with end-stage heart failure. In contrast tototal artificial hearts, ventricular assist devices support the failing heart by bypassing one or both ventricles. In certain cases (myocardial tumors, graftfailure, transplant rejection, endocarditis, intracardiac thrombus formation),however, it may be advantageous to excise the heart and replace it with anartificial device. Total artificial hearts are intracorporeal devices designedfor this purpose. Unfortunately, some patients are too small or are, for otherreasons, ineligible for a total artificial heart. We describe the case of a55-year-old woman who had ischemic cardiomyopathy and thrombus formation in all 4cardiac chambers. To reduce the risk of thromboembolic events, we elected toreplace her heart completely with 2 extracorporeal ventricular assist devices.The heart was excised via a median stemotomy approach, and the outflow cannulae(from device to patient) were connected to both atrial remnants. The 2 inflowcannulae (from patient to device) were anastomosed end-to-end to the aorta andthe pulmonary artery, respectively. After attaining a flow of more than 5 L, the 2 extracorporeal assist devices effectively and efficiently performed the work ofthe native heart. Thus re-established, organ perfusion was improved by thismechanically driven circulation, as signified by an initial decrease increatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels. The patient, however, did not recover from postoperative neurological dysfunction and died of respiratory insufficiencyand multiple-organ failure on the 26th postoperative day.PMCID: PMC548242