: 23916933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]379. Tex Heart Inst J. 2013;40(3):229-34.Safety and feasibility of mapping and stem cell delivery in the presence of animplanted left ventricular assist device: a preclinical investigation in sheep.Zheng Y(1), Sampaio LC, Li K, Silva GV, Cabreira-Hansen M, Vela D, Segura AM,Bovè C, Perin EC.Author information: (1)The Stem Cell Center and Cardiovascular Pathology Research Department, TexasHeart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.The objective of this study was to determine the safety and feasibility ofperforming transendocardial electromechanical mapping and mesenchymal precursorstem cell injections after left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation in a sheep model of acute myocardial infarction. Six sheep were assigned to eitheran acute or chronic group. Then we created an acute myocardial infarction in eachby occluding the distal left anterior descending coronary artery with a balloonfor 90 minutes. All the sheep underwent LVAD implantation 30 days later. On thesame day, sheep in the acute group underwent transendocardial cell injections andwere euthanized. Sheep in the chronic group received cell injections 2 weeksafter LVAD implantation and were euthanized 30 days later. The presence of theLVAD or the use of chest-closure wires did not interfere with electromechanicalmapping. Furthermore, no adverse events were observed during electromechanicalmapping or the stem cell injections. In all sheep, the LVAD flow rate wasapproximately 4 L/min during mapping and the injections, and no adjustments were required. Histologic analysis confirmed that the mesenchymal precursor stem cellswere successfully delivered. No differences were observed between the acute andchronic groups. In conclusion, our study showed that transendocardialelectromechanical mapping and stem cell injections are safe and feasible in thepresence of an LVAD. Surgically implanted metal devices, including the LVAD,steel chest-closure wire, and skin staples, were compatible with theelectromechanical mapping system.PMCID: PMC3709201