: 15096961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1544. J Surg Res. 2004 May 1;118(1):66-70.Interaction between isolated human myocardial mast cells and culturedfibroblasts.Skrabal CA(1), Thompson LO, Southard RE, Joyce DL, Noon GP, Loebe M, Youker KA.Author information: (1)Baylor College of Medicine, Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Divisionof Transplant Surgery and Assist Devices, Houstion, Texas 77030, USA.cskrabal@fastmail.fmINTRODUCTION: Previously, we reported an increase in interstitial collagen andtotal mast-cell numbers in heart failure versus normal myocardium. A secondaryincrease, primarily in chymase-negative mast cells, occurred following LVADsupport compared to matched pre-LVAD tissue samples and was associated with adecrease in interstitial collagen and bFGF. To further elucidate the changes ininterstitial collagen, we investigated the direct interaction between mast cells,isolated from failing myocardium with or without previous LVAD support, and humanfibroblasts in a coculture model. Additionally, the expression of HSP-47, thepro-collagen-specific chaperone protein, was determined in the particularmyocardium.MATERIALS AND METHODS: Myocardial tissue was obtained from 10 patients withend-stage dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) at the time of transplantation. Fivepatients were transplanted following LVAD support, five patients without previousLVAD support. Mast cells were isolated according to a standard protocol,including collagenase digestion and cell separation. The isolated mast cells wereco-cultured with human fibroblasts for 12 h, with or without stimulation ofdegranulation, and protein synthesis was measured by [(3)H]-prolineincorporation. HSP-47 immunostaining was performed in the different myocardialsamples and the positive cells were quantified.RESULTS: Stimulated mast cells isolated from DCM tissue (without previous LVADsupport) caused a 92% increase in [(3)H]-proline incorporation and consequentlyin protein production in fibroblasts compared to mast-cell free culture (P <0.01), while conversely stimulated mast cells isolated from LVAD supportedmyocardium decreased the [(3)H]-proline incorporation by 63% (P < 0.01) belowbaseline. Nonstimulated mast cells did not significantly alter the proteinproduction over baseline. There was also a significant increase in the number of HSP-47-positive cells in DCM myocardium compared to normal (P < 0.01) and therewas a shift toward normal after LVAD support (P < 0.01).CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that fibroblast protein production in vitro issignificantly altered by mast cells and that the direction of change is dependenton whether myocardium was supported by LVAD. We suggest that under long-term LVADsupport there is a phenotypic alteration in myocardial mast cells, which leads toa change in concentration and/or composition of mediators, capable ofre-remodeling the myocardial matrix.