: 25349161  [PubMed - in process]91. Clin Res Cardiol. 2015 Feb;104(2):95-111. doi: 10.1007/s00392-014-0771-6. Epub2014 Oct 28.An insight into short- and long-term mechanical circulatory support systems.Ferrari M(1), Kruzliak P, Spiliopoulos K.Author information: (1)Clinic of Internal Medicine 1, HSK, Klinikum der Landeshauptstadt Wiesbadenund der HELIOS Kliniken Gruppe, Wiesbaden, Germany.Cardiogenic shock due to acute myocardial infarction, postcardiotomy syndromefollowing cardiac surgery, or manifestation of heart failure remains a clinicalchallenge with high mortality rates, despite ongoing advances in surgicaltechniques, widespread use of primary percutaneous interventions, and medicaltreatment. Clinicians have, therefore, turned to mechanical means of circulatory support. At present, a broad range of devices are available, which may beextracorporeal, implantable, or percutaneous; temporary or long term. Althoughcounter pulsation provided by intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) and comprehensive mechanical support for both the systemic and the pulmonary circulation throughextracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) remain a major tool of acute care inpatients with cardiogenic shock, both before and after surgical or percutaneousintervention, the development of devices such as the Impella or the Tandemheartallows less invasive forms of temporary support. On the other hand, concerningmid-, or long-term support, left ventricular assist devices have evolved from alast resort life-saving therapy to a well-established viable alternative forthousands of heart failure patients caused by the shortage of donor organsavailable for transplantation. The optimal selection of the assist device isbased on the initial consideration according to hemodynamic situation,comorbidities, intended time of use and therapeutic options. The present article offers an update on currently available mechanical circulatory support systems(MCSS) for short and long-term use as well as an insight into futureperspectives.