: 22231716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]685. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Jun;41(6):1366-70. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr203. Epub 2012 Jan 6.Ventricular assist device implantation in patients on percutaneous extracorporeallife support without switching to conventional cardiopulmonary bypass system.Haneya A(1), Philipp A, Puehler T, Ried M, Hilker M, Zink W, Hirt SW, Schmid C.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Regensburg,Regensburg, Germany. assadhaneya@web.deOBJECTIVES: Ventricular assist device (VAD) implantation using cardiopulmonarybypass (CPB) is an established procedure. However, the well-describedcomplications of CPB may exacerbate multiple organ failure and increase bloodproduct transfusions especially in end-stage heart failure patients.METHODS: We describe our successful experience in six consecutive patients withprofound cardiogenic shock, who were provided on an emergency basis with apercutaneous extracorporeal life support (ECLS) system via the peripheralvessels. After stabilization, a VAD was implanted using ECLS without switching toa conventional CPB system to reduce its side effects. We compared the data withthose of 11 patients in whom the VAD was placed with the aid of an additional CPBsystem.RESULTS: The six patients demonstrated a shorter duration of operating room time compared with the patients requiring CPB for device placement. During and aftersurgery, blood loss and blood product transfusions were lower in these patients. The need for mechanical ventilation and inotropic support was shorter and thesurvival rate (100% at 30 days, 83.3% at 3 months and 83.3% at 6 months) washigher when compared with patients who were operated upon with CPB. Two patients were successfully bridged to transplantation. One patient died due to cerebralbleeding after 7 weeks.CONCLUSIONS: Our experience suggests that VAD implantation using percutaneousECLS without switching to conventional CPB is a safe alternative in the bridge tobridge concept, especially in high-risk patients with cardiogenic shock who wouldbenefit from the avoidance of the adverse sequels associated with conventionalCPB.