: 19539085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1086. J Artif Organs. 2009;12(2):90-7. doi: 10.1007/s10047-009-0461-8. Epub 2009 Jun18.Cardiac rehabilitation and artificial heart devices.Ueno A(1), Tomizawa Y.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.Recently, cardiac rehabilitation has gained popularity in Japan becausebeneficial effects on patients' prognosis have been reported. Another reason isthat cardiac rehabilitation has been covered by health insurance since 1988 inJapan. Currently, cardiac rehabilitation is covered for the diseases of anginapectoris, acute myocardial infarction, chronic heart failure (CHF), peripheralarterial disease, and diseases of the aorta and after open-heart surgery. Leftventricular assist devices (LVADs) are sometimes used in patients withprogressive CHF symptoms to provide circulatory support, because in most of thesepatients heart failure does not improve with application of medical therapy,intra-aortic balloon pumping, or a percutaneous cardiopulmonary system. ModernVAD control systems are compact, allowing patients to carry them around withoutdifficulty. Since patient management at the outpatient clinic has becomepossible, patients are able to expand the scope of their activities. Early activerehabilitation in patients implanted with a LVAD improves their condition,favorably impacts the clinical course while they await heart transplantation, andalso improves posttransplant recovery. Exercise therapy is one of the importantcomponents in comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation. Exercise therapy is importantto improve the quality of life of patients with LVADs. Appropriate exercisetherapy is effective for patients with various cardiac conditions who undergodiverse treatments and is practiced actively by many patients. In order tofacilitate cardiac rehabilitation safely and effectively for patients withserious conditions, education for health care professionals is essential. In thisreview, we describe the concept of rehabilitation followed by cardiacrehabilitation for patients with heart failure, patients after open-heartsurgery, and patients with implanted LVADs.