: 15862412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1472. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2005 May;27(5):899-905.Natriuretic peptides and E-selectin as predictors of acute deterioration inpatients with inotrope-dependent heart failure.Potapov EV(1), Hennig F, Wagner FD, Volk HD, Sodian R, Hausmann H, Lehmkuhl HB,Hetzer R.Author information: (1)Deutsches Herzzzentrum Berlin, Department of Cardiothoracic and VascularSurgery, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany. potapov@dhzb.de<potapov@dhzb.de>OBJECTIVE: In patients with inotrope-dependent end-stage heart failure the timelyapplication of the most suitable treatment, i.e. heart transplantation,implantation of a ventricular assist device or conservative treatment, is a keyissue for therapeutic success.METHODS: Seventy-six inotrope-dependent patients with end-stage heart failurewere enrolled. Measurements of hemodynamics, routine laboratory parameters, andclinical examination were performed daily. Additionally, natriuretic peptides(BNP and NT-proBNP) and E-selectin were measured at the end of the study. Thepatients were retrospectively divided into groups with regard to the followingend-points: Group I-deterioration into cardiogenic shock after an initiallystable clinical course (n=26); Group II-stable clinical course withoutdeterioration into cardiogenic (n=41); Group III-weaning from inotropic support(n=9).RESULTS: One day before cardiogenic shock occurred, BNP, NT-proBNP and E-selectinwere significantly elevated in group I compared with group II. A logisticregression model showed that only BNP and E-selectin were independent predictors of clinical deterioration on the following day. The odds ratio (OR) forE-selectin using a cut-off point of 65ng/ml was 8.7 and for BNP using a cut-offof 500pg/ml it was 4.8. In combination, the OR increased to 11.1. Continuousdecrease of NT-proBNP predicted patients in whom weaning from inotropes waspossible.CONCLUSIONS: While routine parameters did not predict the clinical course,elevated BNP and E-selectin independently predicted cardiogenic shock onadmission and 1 day before its occurrence. The combination showed increasedpredictive value.