: 8222172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2038. Crit Care Med. 1993 Aug;21(8):1186-91.Centrifugal ventricular assist device for support of the failing heart aftercardiac surgery.Lee WA(1), Gillinov AM, Cameron DE, Thompson S, Birenbaum I, Baumgartner WA,Stuart RS, Watkins L, Gardner TJ, Gott VL, et al.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD21205.OBJECTIVE: To determine the morbidity and mortality associated with use ofcentrifugal ventricular assist devices for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock andto determine factors that might influence outcome and thus, aid in patientselection.DESIGN: A retrospective study.SETTING: Surgical intensive care unit in a university hospital.PATIENTS: During a 6-yr period, a total of 7,385 adult patients underwent cardiacoperations requiring cardiopulmonary bypass. Myocardial protection consisted ofsingle-dose cold crystalloid cardioplegia and continuous topical hypothermia bysaline lavage. A total of 72 (1%) patients developed postcardiotomy cardiogenicshock. Of 72 patients, 28 met the institutional criteria and were placed oncentrifugal ventricular assist devices.INTERVENTIONS: Twenty-eight adult patients with postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock were supported with centrifugal ventricular assist devices.MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A total of 15 patients received left ventricularassist devices, five received right ventricular assist devices, and eightreceived both right and left ventricular assist devices. Mean age of ventricular assistance patients was 50.8 +/- 12.9 yrs (range 22 to 72), and mean duration of ventricular assistance was 2.8 +/- 2.5 days (range 4 hrs to 10 days; median 2days). Twenty-five complications occurred in 16 patients and included bleeding(13), tamponade (2), systemic embolism (6), seizures (2), and sepsis (2). Ninepatients required reexploration for bleeding or tamponade. Nine (32%) of 28patients were discharged from the hospital. Ventricular assistance for cardiacfailure after transplantation was associated with improved survival (p < .10),while age > 50 yrs and postoperative tamponade each showed trends towardassociation with mortality (p = .10). Survival was not predicted by gender,weight, time on cardiopulmonary bypass, aortic cross-clamp time, urgency ofoperation, or preoperative congestive heart failure. At 27 +/- 20 monthsfollow-up, all survivors were alive and New York Heart Association functionalclass I or II.CONCLUSIONS: These results document a low incidence of ventricular assist device use in a surgical practice that employs a relatively simple method of myocardial protection. When postcardiotomy ventricular assistance was necessary, acentrifugal pump was used and successful outcome and satisfactory long-termresults were possible in nearly one third of patients. Ventricular assistance forcardiac failure after transplantation was associated with improved survival.Older age is a relative contraindication to mechanical ventricular assistance.