: 8608619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1967. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1996 Apr;15(4):423-9.Early progressive mobilization of patients with left ventricular assist devicesis safe and optimizes recovery before heart transplantation.Morrone TM(1), Buck LA, Catanese KA, Goldsmith RL, Cahalin LP, Oz MC, Levin HR.Author information: (1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Columbia University College ofPhysicians and Surgeons, New York, N.Y., USA.BACKGROUND: As early perioperative survival with left ventricular assist devicesupport improves, additional emphasis must be placed on patient rehabilitation.Especially as mean left ventricular assist device support times exceed 100 days, it is essential for health professionals to mobilize patients to prevent theincidence of the deleterious effects of bedrest. The timing of optimal functionalperformance and the safety of rehabilitation has not been described.METHODS: We retrospectively studied patients surviving left ventricular assistdevice implantation (34 of 41 patients; 27 men, 7 women; age 51 +/- 11 years).Physical therapy consisted of progressive mobilization leading to treadmillexercise or cycling. All patients exercised in the "pump on full" mode with flows>or= 3.0 L/min.RESULTS: Twenty of thirty-four patients initiated ambulation at 7 to 10 days withindependent ambulation by 14 days in 55% of the group. Treadmill exercise wastolerated by 82% of the patients, begun at postoperative day 21 by eighteenpatients. The greatest improvement in exercise performance was seen by 6 to 8weeks (20 to 30 minutes at 3.17 +/- 0.79 metabolic equivalents). Maximalfunctional capacity achieved was influenced by medical complications. A total of 1878 treatment sessions lasting 1390 hours was performed. Only four minorincidents occurred representing 2.9 incidents/1000 patient hours; all involved a transient decrease in pump flow. None of these events resulted in an increase in morbidity or mortality.CONCLUSIONS: Progressive mobilization in patients with left ventricular assistdevice is safe. Patients return to independence in activities of daily living andtolerate prolonged workloads of up to 5 metabolic equivalents. There is rapidimprovement in functional capacity until 6 weeks after operation. Delay intransplantation until this time may optimize postoperative recovery.