: 8561611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1978. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996 Jan;61(1):380-7; discussion 391-2.Patient selection for mechanical bridging to transplantation.Stevenson LW(1).Author information: (1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts02115, USA.BACKGROUND: Patients with advanced heart failure often cannot undergo cardiactransplantation soon enough to prevent fatal hemodynamic deterioration or sudden death. The approach to these patients includes tailoring of medical therapy with vasodilators and diuretics, which allows stabilization of 60% to 80% of potentialcandidates. Current criteria for mechanical support before transplantationcurrently focus on the identification of hospitalized patients with at least 30% chance of death before transplantation. The much larger question relates to thepotential use of mechanical support to bridge ambulatory patients, who represent 90% to 95% of the transplant waiting list, with waiting times frequentlyexceeding 2 years.METHODS: From 1988 to 1993, 265 potential candidates were discharged afterevaluation for transplantation with New York Heart Association class IV statusand left ventricular ejection fraction of 0.25 or less. Patients were analyzedfor clinical hemodynamic and echocardiographic profiles that would identifyambulatory patients unlikely to survive without urgent transplantation.RESULTS: After tailored medical therapy, presenting hemodynamic parameters arenot useful for predicting 2-year survival without urgent transplantation, whichwas 45% at 2 years. Left ventricular diastolic dimension of 80 mm or greater was associated with only 29% two-year survival without urgent transplantation. Serum sodium level less than 132 mEq/L predicted 35% two-year survival without urgenttransplantation. Peak oxygen consumption less than 10 mL.kg-1.min-1 identifiedpoor outcome but was often not measured in patients with resting symptoms.CONCLUSIONS: Although definition of indications for urgent bridging requirescomplex clinical assessment based on immediate risk, it should be possible toidentify a larger ambulatory population for whom improved devices will offerextended survival without transplantation.