: 11713852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1719. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2001 Nov;20(11):1181-7.Analysis of sympathetic nerve activity in end-stage cardiomyopathy patientsreceiving left ventricular support.Miyagawa S(1), Sawa Y, Fukushima N, Nishimura M, Matsumiya G, Taketani S,Horiguchi K, Ohtake S, Matsuda H.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Osaka UniversityGraduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.BACKGROUND: The left ventricular assist system (LVAS) has been used increasingly for patients with end-stage heart failure who are awaiting transplantation.Sympathetic nerve activity is known to correlate with cardiac function in chronicheart failure patients, but little is known about sympathetic nerve activityduring LVAS support. In this study, we examined the status of sympathetic nerveactivity in relation to mechanical support.METHODS: In this study, we included 10 consecutive patients with end-stagecardiomyopathy who were on LVAS support for at least 2 months (duration, 222 +/- 59 days). None of these patients achieved enough functional recovery to be taken off LVAS. In these patients, we used iodine-125-metaiodobenzylguanidine(125I-MIBG) scintigraphy to examine the change of sympathetic nerve activityafter LVAS implantation, and compared the results with the change of atrialnatriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels as well aswith histologic optional findings. Samples for ANP and BNP measurement wereobtained before and 30 days after LVAS implantation. Specimens for histologicanalysis were obtained at the time of LVAS implantation and at the time ofcardiac transplantation or autopsy.RESULTS: We observed marked decrease in serum levels of ANP and BNP 1 month afterLVAS implantation. But myocardial sympathetic nerve function, which was evaluatedwith 125I-MIBG scintigraphy and expressed as the heart-to-mediastinum activityratio, remained below normal even 2 months after the LVAS implantation (1.57 +/- 0.19; normal, 2.34 +/- 0.36). Serial histologic analysis in these 10 patientsshowed continuous increase in percentage of fibrosis and cell diameter despiteventricular unloading by the LVAS.CONCLUSIONS: Sympathetic nerve function, which was evaluated on 125I-MIBGscintigraphy, did not improve during left ventricular support. Because none ofthe patients included in our study showed improvement in cardiac function orhistologic findings, the recovery of myocardial sympathetic nerve function may bean important factor in myocardial recovery for cardiomyopathy patients on LVASsupport.