: 19671580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1063. Int J Artif Organs. 2009 Jun;32(6):344-53.Initial results of clinical trial with a new left ventricular assist device(LVAD) providing synchronous pulsatile flow.Gazzoli F(1), Viganò M, Pagani F, Alloni A, Silvaggio G, Panzavolta M, ElBanayosy A, Koerfer R, Morshuis M, Pavie A, Leprince P, Glauber M, Del Sarto P,Haxhademi D, Vitali E, Russo CF, Scuri S.Author information: (1)Heart Surgery, IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.f.gazzoli@smatteo.pv.itOBJECTIVES: A multicentric European Clinical Study is ongoing to evaluate safety and efficacy of a new pulsatile implantable LVAD (BestBeat), smaller and lighter than similar devices, capable of providing synchronous and counterpulsating flow with respect to the LV of end-stage heart failure patients. Preliminary clinical results are reported.METHODS: The new BestBeat LVAD was used, consisting of an implantable pulsatileblood pump, electromechanically driven by a ball screw mechanism, and a wearable electronic controller and power sources. The clinical trial was conducted at 5european centers. Adult patients affected by CHF in NYHA Class IV despiteoptimized medical treatment were enrolled. The primary study endpoint wassurvival at 90 days. Further study endpoints were maintenance of adequate LVADpump flow and a minimum rate of adverse events during support.RESULTS: As of June 2008, 6 patients received the implant. Cumulative supporttime was 3.7 years, median support time 176 days. All patients who completed the study survived except for one, who died after 48 days, due to combined infection and cerebrovascular accident. Another two patients died: one from intracranialbleeding 113 days after implant, and one from septic shock after 123 days.Hemodynamic improvement with CI>2.0 l/min/m2 and recovery of end-organ functionexpressed by consistent improvement of BUN, creatinine and bilirubin were reachedin all patients. No device failure was observed. There was no bleeding requiring re-exploration, no hemolysis and only two device-related infections (both in one patient). Neurologic events were reported, the most serious ones occurring inpatients with pre-implant respiratory and kidney failure. Three patients weredischarged home. Two patients were successfully transplanted, one after 6 months and one after 13 months on device.CONCLUSIONS: Good performance and efficacy of the device were observed; theendpoints of the study were achieved, and its safety was consistent withexpectations. The ongoing study will allow further conclusions to be drawn.