: 15063398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1550. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004 Apr;77(4):1321-7.Longitudinal change in quality of life and impact on survival after leftventricular assist device implantation.Grady KL(1), Meyer PM, Dressler D, Mattea A, Chillcott S, Loo A, White-WilliamsC, Todd B, Ormaza S, Kaan A, Costanzo MR, Piccione W.Author information: (1)Section of Cardiology, Rush Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplant Program, RushUniversity Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612-3824, USA. kgrady@rush.eduBACKGROUND: The HeartMate vented electric left ventricular assist device has beenapproved for use as destination therapy. Thus, the study of quality-of-lifeoutcomes, as well as morbidity and mortality, is imperative. The purpose of ourstudy was to describe change with time (from 1 month to 1 year) in patients whoreceived a HeartMate vented electric left ventricular assist device as a bridgeto heart transplantation and to identify quality-of-life predictors of survivalafter left ventricular assist device implantation.METHODS: A nonrandom sample of 78 patients who received a HeartMate ventedelectric left ventricular assist device (primarily middle-aged, white marriedmales) who had quality-of-life data at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, or 12 months after implant was the subject of this report. The sample size decreased with time primarilybecause of heart transplantation. Patients completed the following booklets ofquestionnaires: Quality of Life Index, Rating Question Form, Heart FailureSymptom Checklist, and Sickness Impact Profile. Analyses included bothdescriptive analyses and modeling procedures (mixed-effects models and Coxproportional hazards models).RESULTS: Quality-of-life outcomes were fairly good and stable from 1 month to 1year after HeartMate vented electric left ventricular assist device implantation.Both positive and negative changes were detected in all quality-of-life domains(physical and occupational function, social interaction, somatic sensation, andpsychological state) after left ventricular assist device insertion. Items fromthe physical domain of quality of life, specifically walking and dressingoneself, were significantly associated with the risk of dying after leftventricular assist device implantation.CONCLUSIONS: Identifying poor quality-of-life outcomes within 1 year after leftventricular assist device implantation provides direction to develop strategiesto improve outcomes. Physical and occupational rehabilitation, psychosocialintervention, and monitoring symptom distress and physical disability maycontribute to improved quality-of-life outcomes and survival after leftventricular assist device implantation.