: 18574369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1200. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008 Aug;34(2):289-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2008.05.011.Epub 2008 Jun 20.HeartMate II left ventricular assist device; early European experience.Strüber M(1), Sander K, Lahpor J, Ahn H, Litzler PY, Drakos SG, Musumeci F,Schlensak C, Friedrich I, Gustafsson R, Oertel F, Leprince P.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic, Transplantation and Vascular Surgery, HannoverMedical School, Hannover, Germany. strueber.martin@mh-hannover.deOBJECTIVE: The novel axial flow left ventricular assist device HeartMate II wasintroduced into clinical practice in Europe as part of the pilot study and after CE approval in November 2005. In order to get an overview of the use andperformance of the device in Europe a group of investigators was founded tocompare the initial results.METHODS: In a retrospective analysis of the first 101 consecutive cases inEurope, data were collected with regard to postoperative outcome and severeadverse events and anticoagulation protocols. Results were stratified byintention to treat as a bridge to transplant or as chronic support therapy inheart failure (destination therapy).RESULTS: In 70% of patients, the HeartMate II was intended as a bridge totransplant therapy, in 30%, it was used as a destination therapy device. Theperioperative mortality post implant was 20% in the bridge to transplant patientsand 7% in the destination therapy arm. However, after 1 year a comparablesurvival was observed in both groups (69% destination therapy, 63% bridge totransplant). Main causes of death were multiple organ failure (n=12) andcerebrovascular accidents (n=5). All, but one cerebrovascular accident occurredin the first 9 days after surgery. Only one other death was reported thereafterand there was no mechanical failure of the device.CONCLUSIONS: Even in the early experience the HeartMate II was used as a chronic support device in a substantial number of patients in Europe. Although the total experience is still limited, the incidence of cerebrovascular accidents is verylow and the survival beyond the perioperative period is excellent.