: 25824553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]23. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015 May;47(5):770-7. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezv096. Epub2015 Mar 27.The European Registry for Patients with Mechanical Circulatory Support(EUROMACS): first annual report†.de By TM(1), Mohacsi P(2), Gummert J(3), Bushnaq H(4), Krabatsch T(5), GustafssonF(6), Leprince P(7), Martinelli L(8), Meyns B(9), Morshuis M(3), Netuka I(10),Potapov E(5), Zittermann A(3), Delmo Walter EM(5), Hetzer R(5); EUROMACS members.Author information: (1)Euromacs e.V. c/o Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin, Berlin, Germanytheodeby@euromacs.org paul.mohacsi@insel.ch. (2)Department of Cardiology, SwissCardiovascular Center, University Hospital (Inselspital), Bern, Switzerland.(3)Herz- und Diabeteszentrum NRW, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.(4)Universitätsklinikum Halle, Halle, Germany. (5)Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin,Berlin, Germany. (6)Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. (7)Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Hôpital Pitié Salpetrière, Paris, France. (8)AO Niguarda Ca Granda, Milan, Italy. (9)Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (10)IKEM,Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.The European Registry for Patients with Mechanical Circulatory Support (EUROMACS)was founded on 10 December 2009 with the initiative of Roland Hetzer (DeutschesHerzzentrum Berlin, Berlin, Germany) and Jan Gummert (Herz- und DiabeteszentrumNordrhein-Westfalen, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany) with 15 other foundinginternational members. It aims to promote scientific research to improve care of end-stage heart failure patients with ventricular assist device or a totalartificial heart as long-term mechanical circulatory support. Likewise, theorganization aims to provide and maintain a registry of device implantation data and long-term follow-up of patients with mechanical circulatory support. Hence,EUROMACS affiliated itself with Dendrite Clinical Systems Ltd to offer itsmembers a software tool that allows input and analysis of patient clinical dataon a daily basis. EUROMACS facilitates further scientific studies by offeringresearch groups access to any available data wherein patients and centres areanonymized. Furthermore, EUROMACS aims to stimulate cooperation with clinical andresearch institutions and with peer associations involved to further its aims.EUROMACS is the only European-based Registry for Patients with MechanicalCirculatory Support with rapid increase in institutional and individualmembership. Because of the expeditious data input, the European Association forCardiothoracic Surgeons saw the need to optimize the data availability and thesignificance of the registry to improve care of patients with mechanicalcirculatory support and its potential contribution to scientific intents; hence, the beginning of their alliance in 2012. This first annual report is designed to provide an overview of EUROMACS' structure, its activities, a first datacollection and an insight to its scientific contributions.© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.