: 23080091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]551. Cardiovasc Res. 2013 Feb 1;97(2):230-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvs318. Epub 2012 Oct18.Influence of ivabradine on reverse remodelling during mechanical unloading.Navaratnarajah M(1), Ibrahim M, Siedlecka U, van Doorn C, Shah A, Gandhi A, Dias P, Sarathchandra P, Yacoub MH, Terracciano CM.Author information: (1)Harefield Heart Science Centre, Imperial College London, National Heart andLung Institute, Laboratory of Cellular Electrophysiology, Harefield Hospital,Middlesex, Harefield UB9 6JH, UK.AIMS: Ivabradine (Iva) has shown beneficial structural and functional effects in clinical and experimental heart failure (HF), but its action in combination with mechanical unloading (MU), such as during treatment with left ventricular assist devices (LVAD), is unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of Iva during MU, in a rodent model of HF.METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied the chronic effects (4 weeks) of Iva (10mg/kg/day) alone and in combination with MU [induced by heterotopic abdominalheart transplantation (HATx)] on whole-heart and cellular structure, function,and excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling in a rodent (rat) model of HF, 12 weekspost-left coronary artery (LCA) ligation. Effects of Iva were compared with thoseof β-blockade using metoprolol [(Met), 250 mg/kg/day]. Iva, but not Met, reversedmyocardial fibrosis, alone and in combination with MU. MU-induced restoration of deranged E-C coupling was enhanced by Iva to a greater extent than Met: both Iva and Met enhanced the recovery of the Ca(2+) transient amplitude and thesarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) content, but Iva alone maintained MU-inducednormalization of L-type Ca(2+) current and t-tubule abnormalities. Met prevented MU-induced reduction in the myocardial size (myocardial atrophy); Iva had noeffect on this parameter.CONCLUSION: Iva shows beneficial structural and E-C coupling effects during MU:Iva reverses myocardial fibrosis and enhances the restoration of deranged E-Ccoupling, displaying more beneficial effects than that of Met. These resultssuggest that Iva may prove effective in enhancing functional recovery in heartfailure patients receiving LVAD therapy.