: 24361803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]303. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Apr;33(4):412-21. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2013.10.017. Epub 2013 Oct 23.Overall quality of life improves to similar levels after mechanical circulatorysupport regardless of severity of heart failure before implantation.Grady KL(1), Naftel D(2), Stevenson L(3), Dew MA(4), Weidner G(5), Pagani FD(6), Kirklin JK(2), Myers S(2), Baldwin T(7), Young J(8).Author information: (1)Division of Cardiac Surgery, Department of Surgery, Northwestern University,Chicago, Illinois. Electronic address: kgrady@nmh.org. (2)Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama. (3)CardiovascularDivision, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Departments of Epidemiology, Biostatistics, and Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School ofMedicine and Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (5)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California. (6)Center forCirculatory Support, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (7)the NationalHeart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. (8)Cleveland ClinicFoundation, Cleveland, Ohio.BACKGROUND: The severity of pre-implantation heart failure may affectpost-implantation health-related quality of life (HRQOL). The purpose of ourstudy was to examine differences in HRQOL from before mechanical circulatorysupport (MCS) through 1 year after surgery by Interagency Registry forMechanically Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) patient profiles.METHODS: Data from 1,559 adults with advanced heart failure who received primary continuous-flow pumps between June 23, 2006, and March 31, 2010, and wereenrolled in INTERMACS were analyzed. HRQOL data were collected using the EQ-5D-3Lsurvey before implantation and at 3, 6, and 12 months after implantation.Statistical analyses included chi-square and t-tests, using all available datafor each time period. Paired t-tests and sensitivity analyses were alsoconducted.RESULTS: HRQOL was poor before MCS implantation among patients with INTERMACSprofiles 1 to 7 and significantly improved after MCS implantation for allprofiles. Stratified by INTERMACS profile, problems within each of the 5dimensions of HRQOL (i.e., mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain, andanxiety/depression) generally decreased from before to after implantation. By 6months after implantation, patients with all INTERMACS profiles reported similar frequencies of problems for all HRQOL dimensions. Paired t-tests and sensitivity analyses supported almost all of our findings.CONCLUSIONS: HRQOL is poor among advanced heart failure patients with INTERMACSprofiles 1 to 7 before MCS implantation and improves to similar levels forpatients who remained on MCS 1 year after surgery. Patients have problems inHRQOL dimensions before and after MCS; however, the frequency of reportingproblems decreases for all dimensions within most profiles across time.© 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Published byInternational Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC3966941