: 23758964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]423. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2013 Jun;14(5 Suppl 1):S69-72. doi:10.1097/PCC.0b013e318292e332.Recurrent or prolonged mechanical circulatory support: bridge to recovery or roadto nowhere?d'Udekem Y(1), Shime N, Lou S, MacLaren G.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne,Australia. yves.dudekem@rch.org.auRemarkable outcomes have been reported after prolonged mechanical circulatorysupport in the pediatric population, but there is yet no clear delineation of theduration beyond which supporting a child becomes futile. The likelihood ofsurvival in patients supported on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation forrespiratory failure decreases with the length of support. However, extracorporealmembrane oxygenation can be successfully used in these patients for long periods (weeks to months) provided adequate support is maintained without complications. This is not the case with cardiac failure and mechanical circulatorysupport.Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is usually the initial form ofmechanical circulatory support used in patients with primary refractorymyocardial dysfunction. There is evidence and consensus that if the patient showsno signs of recovery after a maximum duration of 2 weeks, he or she should betransitioned to a ventricular assist device, which allows prolonged support. Inpost-cardiac surgery patients, survival is only anecdotal beyond 12 days ofextracorporeal membrane oxygenation support, and myocardial recovery isexceptionally rare after this time period unless new diagnoses and managementstrategies are formulated.Repeat extracorporeal membrane oxygenation shouldgenerally not be offered to patients unless it is established that support waswithdrawn prematurely or a new intervention is planned. Repeat extracorporealmembrane oxygenation may achieve some improvement in early survival, but thelong-term outcomes of survivors are so poor that these attempts cannot begenerally recommended unless organ transplantation is an option.