: 23990618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]360. Circ Res. 2013 Aug 30;113(6):777-91. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.301413.Molecular changes after left ventricular assist device support for heart failure.Birks EJ(1).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Louisville, Louisville,KY, USA. emma.birks@louisville.eduHeart failure is associated with remodeling that consists of adverse cellular,structural, and functional changes in the myocardium. Until recently, this wasthought to be unidirectional, progressive, and irreversible. However,irreversibility has been shown to be incorrect because complete or partialreversal can occur that can be marked after myocardial unloading with a leftventricular assist device (LVAD). Patients with chronic advanced heart failurecan show near-normalization of nearly all structural abnormalities of themyocardium or reverse remodeling after LVAD support. However, reverse remodeling does not always equate with clinical recovery. The molecular changes occurringafter LVAD support are reviewed, both those demonstrated with LVAD unloadingalone in patients bridged to transplantation and those occurring in themyocardium of patients who have recovered enough myocardial function to have the device removed. Reverse remodeling may be attributable to a reversal of thepathological mechanisms that occur in remodeling or the generation of newpathways. A reduction in cell size occurs after LVAD unloading, which does notnecessarily correlate with improved cardiac function. However, some of thechanges in both the cardiac myocyte and the matrix after LVAD support arespecific to myocardial recovery. In the myocyte, increases in the cytoskeletalproteins and improvements in the CaÂ²â?º handling pathway seem to be specificallyassociated with myocardial recovery. Changes in the matrix are complex, butexcessive scarring appears to limit the ability for recovery, and the degree offibrosis in the myocardium at the time of implantation may predict the ability torecover.