: 15672778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1496. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005 Jan;24(1):73-80.Sarcomeric genes involved in reverse remodeling of the heart during leftventricular assist device support.Rodrigue-Way A(1), Burkhoff D, Geesaman BJ, Golden S, Xu J, Pollman MJ, Donoghue M, Jeyaseelan R, Houser S, Breitbart RE, Marks A, Acton S.Author information: (1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) implanted in patients withsevere congestive heart failure (CHF) as a bridge to transplantation have beenshown to reverse chamber enlargement, regress cellular hypertrophy, and increase contractility. The purpose of this study was to gain a better understanding ofthe molecular changes associated with increased contractility after LVAD support.METHODS: We took tissue sections from the left ventricular apex of 12 patientswith CHF who were undergoing LVAD insertion (pre-LVAD) and from the LV free wall of those same patients before transplantation (post-LVAD). To control forsample-site differences, we obtained samples from the same regions in 7 patients with CHF who were undergoing transplantation without LVAD support and in 4 non-failing donor hearts. Gene expression was then probed on a custom DNA arraycontaining 2,700 cardiac-enriched cDNA clones.RESULTS: Calcium-handling genes were up-regulated by LVAD support, as previously reported. Sarcomeric genes were the other principle class of genes up-regulatedby LVAD support, consistent with a possible restoration of sarcomere structure inreverse ventricular remodeling. However, a decrease in the fibrous component ofthe myocardium, also potentially involved in reverse remodeling, was not evident at the level of gene transcription because fibroblast markers were eitherunchanged or up-regulated. The remaining regulated genes did not fall into anydefined functional class.CONCLUSIONS: Changes in the regulation of sarcomeric, calcium-handling, andfibroblast genes during LVAD support indicate a cardiac molecular adaptation tomechanical unloading. These molecular changes may play a role in the observedincrease in contractile function during reverse remodeling.