: 20123247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1000. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Jan;29(1):86-92. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.10.005.Progressive improvement in cardiac performance with continuous aortic flowaugmentation (aortic flow therapy) in patients hospitalized with severe heartfailure: results of the Multicenter Trial of the Orqis Medical Cancion System forthe Enhanced Treatment of Heart Failure Unresponsive to Medical Therapy(MOMENTUM).Zile MR(1), Colombo PC, Mehra M, Greenberg B, Brown S, Konstam MA.Author information: (1)RHJ Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center Charleston, MedicalUniversity of South Carolina, South Carolina 29425, USA. zilem@musc.eduBACKGROUND: Previous studies indicate that superimposing incremental continuousflow on pulsatile aortic flow (aortic flow therapy, AFT) yields an increase incardiac output. This study examined whether improvement in this hemodynamic indexis independent of changes in loading conditions and represents an improvement in cardiac performance.METHODS: The Multi-center Trial of Orqis Medical Cancion System for EnhancedTreatment of Heart Failure (HF) Unresponsive to Medical Therapy (MOMENTUM) was a randomized trial comparing AFT plus medical therapy (n = 109) vs medical therapy alone (n = 59) in patients hospitalized with HF inadequately responsive totherapy. Entry required reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) andcardiac index, elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), and impairedrenal function or high diuretic requirement despite intravenous inotrope orvasodilator treatment. AFT was achieved for up to 96 hours using anarterial-to-arterial circuit (flow up to 1.5 liters/min). Changes in cardiacperformance were assessed using the relationship between cardiac index (CI) orstroke work (SW = stroke volume x [Mean blood pressure - PCWP] x 0.00133, kg.cm) and PCWP.RESULTS: In the control group, a decrease in PCWP was accompanied by a decline inSW from 3.2 +/- 1.4 at baseline to 2.7 +/- 0.9 kg.cm at 4 days. AFT increased SW (from 3.0 +/- 1.6 at baseline to 3.3 +/- 1.7 kg.cm at 4 days; p < 0.0001) anddecreased PCWP. An upward-leftward shift occurred in the SW vs PCWP relationship in the AFT group.CONCLUSIONS: AFT resulted in a progressive upward-leftward shift in the SW-PCWPrelation compared with the control group, demonstrating improvement in cardiacperformance independent of load-related effects.Copyright (c) 2010 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.