: 11333808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1745. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2001 May;121(5):902-8.Time course of reverse remodeling of the left ventricle during support with aleft ventricular assist device.Madigan JD(1), Barbone A, Choudhri AF, Morales DL, Cai B, Oz MC, Burkhoff D.Author information: (1)Departments of Medicine and Surgery, Columbia University, Black Building 812, 650 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. jdm50@columbia.eduBACKGROUND: Support with a left ventricular assist device leads to normalization of left ventricular chamber geometry, regression of myocyte hypertrophy,alterations in left ventricular collagen content, and normalized expression ofgenes involved with excitation-contraction coupling in patients with heartfailure. The objective of this study was to investigate the time course of these processes.METHODS: Passive left ventricular pressure-volume relationships were obtainedfrom explanted hearts of 19 patients with heart failure undergoingtransplantation without left ventricular assist device support, 25 patients with heart failure supported before transplantation (duration of support rangingbetween 8 and 155 days), and 5 normal human hearts not suitable fortransplantation. Left ventricular size was indexed by the volume at which leftventricular pressure reached 30 mm Hg. Left ventricular tissue samples wereprobed for sarcoplasmic endoreticular calcium adenosine triphosphatase 2aexpression and processed for analysis of myocyte diameter and relative myocardialcollagen content.RESULTS: The volume at which left ventricular pressure reached 30 mm Hg was notsignificantly different between hearts without and with assist device support forless than 40 days. However, the volume at which left ventricular pressure reached30 mm Hg in patients with assist devices supported for more than 40 days wassignificantly smaller than that of the hearts without assist devices but waslarger than that of normal hearts. A similar pattern was observed for myocytediameter. Sarcoplasmic endoreticular calcium adenosine triphosphatase 2aexpression increased to normal levels by about 20 days of support with an assist device. Relative collagen content was significantly increased in hearts supportedfor more than 40 days.CONCLUSION: Maximum structural reverse remodeling by left ventricular assistdevices is complete by about 40 days. Molecular reverse remodeling ofsarcoplasmic endoreticular calcium adenosine triphosphatase 2a expression isquicker, being complete by about 20 days.