: 14976692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1562. J Card Fail. 2003 Dec;9(6):459-63.Recovery from heart failure with circulatory assist: a working group of theNational, Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.Reinlib L(1), Abraham W; Working Group of the National, Heart, Lung, and BloodInstitute.Author information: (1)Division of Heart and Vascular Diseases, National Heart, Lung, and BloodInstitute, National Institutes of Health, United States Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.BACKGROUND: Over the past decade, mechanical circulatory support has beenbeneficial as a bridge to cardiac transplantation, and anecdotal evidencesuggests that heart failure patients fitted with mechanical assist devicesexperience direct cardiac benefits. Moreover, recent trials on limited numbersand subpopulations of patients--notably the Randomized Evaluation of MechanicalAssistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH)--supportearlier observations of improved cardiac function and point towards the use ofassist devices as destination therapy. Methods and results To investigate thisphenomenon, on August 2-3, 2001, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Instituteconvened the working group, "Recovery from Heart Failure with Circulatory Assist"in Bethesda, Maryland. The team included cardiac surgeons, cardiologists, andexperts in experimental research. The goal was to prioritize recommendations toguide future programs in: (1). elucidating the mechanisms leading to reverseremodeling associated with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD); (2).exploring advanced treatments, including novel pharmacologies, tissueengineering, and cell therapies, to optimize recovery with LVAD therapy; and (3).identifying target genes, proteins, and cellular pathways to focus on forproduction of novel therapies for myocardial recovery and cardiovascular disease.CONCLUSIONS: The working group also made research and clinical recommendations toeventually translate findings into improved therapeutic strategies and devicedesign: (1). support collaborations among clinical and basic scientists with anemphasis on clinical/translational research that might eventually lead toclinical trials; (2). identify candidate patients most likely to benefit fromLVAD as a destination therapy; (3). explore potential biomarkers indicating when patients could most successfully be weaned from devices; and (4). promoteclinical and experimental study of mechanically assisted organs and the tissuederived from them.