: 12595851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1650. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2003 Feb;22(2):137-46.Dobutamine stress echocardiography predicts myocardial improvement in patientssupported by left ventricular assist devices (LVADs): hemodynamic and histologic evidence of improvement before LVAD explantation.Khan T(1), Delgado RM, Radovancevic B, Torre-Amione G, Abrams J, Miller K, Myers T, Okerberg K, Stetson SJ, Gregoric I, Hernandez A, Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiopulmonary Transplantation at the Texas Heart Institute at St Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77225-0345, USA.BACKGROUND: Cardiac function may improve in patients with end-stage heart failurewho receive long-term support (>30 days) with left ventricular assist devices(LVADs). Dobutamine stress echocardiography (DSE) has been used to quantitatemyocardial recovery in patients with heart failure supported with LVADs. Byrecording the hemodynamic response with the use of DSE, we evaluated and applied the resulting data to patients receiving LVAD support.METHODS AND RESULTS: The study population included 16 patients who underwent LVADimplantation, regained functional capacity on full LVAD support, and tolerateddecreased mechanical support with no worsening of dyspnea or fatigue. All 16patients underwent dobutamine stress with increasing doses of dobutamine (from 5 to 40 mcg/kg/min). Hemodynamics and 2-dimensional (2-D) echocardiography wasperformed at each dose level. In addition, paired myocardial samples wereobtained and analyzed histologically to determine myocyte size and collagencontent. Dobutamine stress separated the study population into 2 groups: thosewho had favorable responses to dobutamine (9/16) and those who had unfavorableresponses (i.e., experienced hemodynamic deterioration; 7/16). Favorabledobutamine responses were characterized by improved cardiac index, improvedforce-frequency relationship in the left ventricle (dP/dt), improved leftventricular ejection fraction, and decreased left ventricular end-diastolicdimension. All 9 favorable responders underwent LVAD explantation, and 6 survivedfor more than 12 months. In all patients studied, LVAD support resulted indecreased myocyte size (n = 14, 33.9 +/- 0.9 microm before vs 16.6 +/- 0.8 micromafter support, p = 0.0001; normal, 5-15 microm) but resulted in no consistentchanges in collagen content.CONCLUSIONS: Dobutamine stress echocardiography with hemodynamic assessment maybe a useful tool in assessing physiologic improvement in myocardial function ofpatients with end-stage heart failure who receive LVAD support. It may helppredict which patients can tolerate LVAD removal. Prospective analysis of cardiacfunction is now warranted to better define myocardial recovery in patientssupported with LVADs.