: 1763305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2077. Ann Thorac Surg. 1991 Dec;52(6):1237-43; discussion 1243-5.First successful bridge to cardiac transplantation using direct mechanicalventricular actuation.Lowe JE(1), Anstadt MP, Van Trigt P, Smith PK, Hendry PJ, Plunkett MD, AnstadtGL.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina.Comment in    Ann Thorac Surg. 1993 Jan;55(1):198-9.Currently available ventricular assist devices are technically difficult toimplant, require continuous anticoagulation, and are associated with hemorrhagic and thromboembolic complications. Direct mechanical ventricular actuation is abiventricular assist device that can be applied in 3 to 5 minutes through a left anterior thoracotomy and has no direct blood contact or need for anticoagulation.The present study was designed to determine the effects of direct mechanicalventricular actuation in total biventricular circulatory support. Cardiogenicshock refractory to standard therapy developed in 2 patients awaiting cardiactransplantation. Direct mechanical ventricular actuation was applied and providedimmediate hemodynamic stabilization in both. All inotropic agents and intraaorticballoon support were then discontinued. Fifty-six hours of circulatory supportbridged the first patient to successful cardiac transplantation withoutcomplication. The patient is alive and well more than 1 year later withoutincident of infection or rejection. The second patient suffered cardiac arrestand required closed chest cardiopulmonary resuscitation before deviceapplication. After 45 hours of support, it was determined that irreversibleneurologic injury had occurred and direct mechanical ventricular actuation wasdiscontinued. Neither patient's native heart exhibited any histologic evidence ofdevice-related trauma. Direct mechanical ventricular actuation has undergonelimited clinical investigation since its original description 25 years ago, butin these initial trials, the device has proved effective. The concept ofmechanically actuating the ventricles appears to be a valuable, yetunder-utilized method of total circulatory support.