: 16446218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1413. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2006 Feb;25(2):174-80.Brain natriuretic peptide is produced both by cardiomyocytes and cellsinfiltrating the heart in patients with severe heart failure supported by a left ventricular assist device.Bruggink AH(1), de Jonge N, van Oosterhout MF, Van Wichen DF, de Koning E, LahporJR, Kemperman H, Gmelig-Meyling FH, de Weger RA.Author information: (1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands. a.h.bruggink@lab.azu.nlBACKGROUND: Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) is a cardiac neurohormone synthesizedin cardiac ventricles as a result of increased wall stress. Left ventricularassist device (LVAD) support in patients with end-stage heart failure results in reduced wall stress and therefore may change BNP levels in the heart.METHODS: BNP plasma levels were measured in 17 patients with end-stage HF before LVAD implantation and at 1 week, 1 month, and 3 months after LVAD support.BNP-messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in cardiac biopsy specimens of 27 patientsbefore and after LVAD support was determined by quantitative polymerase chainreaction. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and IHC-double staining was used in biopsyspecimens from 32 patients before and after LVAD support to localize the BNPprotein expression in the heart.RESULTS: BNP plasma levels significantly decreased from 1,872 +/- 1,098 pg/mlbefore implantation to 117 +/- 91 pg/ml at 3 months after LVAD implantation. Thisdecrease in plasma levels was accompanied by a significant decrease in mRNAexpression (relative quantity) in the heart. IHC and IHC-double staining showedBNP immunoreactivity in the cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, infiltrating Tcells, and macrophages.CONCLUSIONS: The significant decrease in serum BNP concentration after LVADsupport coincides with a decrease in BNP mRNA and protein expression in theheart. BNP is produced in the left ventricle not only by cardiomyocytes but also by endothelial cells, T cells, and macrophages. Unloading of the left ventricleby a LVAD results in decreased BNP expression in the heart and plasma and mayplay an important role in the reverse remodeling process of the heart.