: 1953099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2079. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1991 Oct;102(4):578-86; discussion 586-7.Clinical experience with the Novacor ventricular assist system. Bridge totransplantation and the transition to permanent application.McCarthy PM(1), Portner PM, Tobler HG, Starnes VA, Ramasamy N, Oyer PE.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Stanford University, Calif.At Stanford University, a Novacor left ventricular assist system (BaxterHealthcare Corporation, Novacor Division, Oakland, Calif.) was placed as a bridgeto heart transplantation in 13 patients. During the hospitalization precedingdevice implantation, all patients were receiving inotropic support forbiventricular failure, 11 had pulmonary edema, 6 had life-threatening ventriculararrhythmias, 5 had liver dysfunction with coagulopathy, and 2 had renal failurenecessitating artificial support. The mean cardiac index before implantation ofthe Novacor system was 1.5. All survivors with the Novacor device had a dramatic increase in cardiac output (mean cardiac index = 3.1). One patient with cardiacallograft rejection died during implantation of the left ventricular assistsystem. Two patients died of pulmonary sepsis and multiorgan failure after thedevice was implanted. All patients who had the Novacor device implanted for more than 7 days were able to walk and ride stationary bicycles while awaitingtransplantation. Ten patients (77%) underwent successful heart transplantationafter a mean of 18 days' support with the Novacor device. One patient died ofpresumed sepsis 2 days after transplantation. Nine patients (90%) are alive 4months to 6 years after transplantation. In the overall United States experience,68 patients (as of May 1990) have had a Novacor left ventricular assist deviceimplanted. Five were still being supported, 39 had received a transplant (62%),and 35 patients (90%) survived the transplant hospitalization (1 died later). No instances of device failure have occurred. Overall, the Novacor assist systemprovided effective bridging to transplantation, with posttransplant survivalsimilar to results after routine transplantation. Modifications and improvements based on this clinical experience have been made in the areas of patientselection, techniques of operative placement, postoperative management, anddesign of the assist system. Isolated left heart support with a fully implantableleft ventricular assist system will be offered as an alternative to hearttransplantation for selected patients by 1992.