: 11792304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1714. Acta Chir Belg. 2001 Sep-Oct;101(5):226-31.Emergency ventricular assist device: better survival rates in non-postcardiotomy-related cardiogenic shock.Rodrigus IE(1), Amsel BJ, Conraads V, De Hert S, Moulijn AC.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.Inez.Rodrigus@uza.beOBJECTIVE: The Abiomed BVS 5000 ventricular assist device (VAD) has been approvedin Belgium for emergency cardiac support in patients with postcardiotomy failure with the aim of native heart function recovery. Other indications have emergedfrom world wide experience, but the indication and usefulness of emergencyimplantation of assist devices is often debated.METHODS: To decide which patients benefit most from emergency ventricular assist device implantation, we retrospectively reviewed our results of mechanicalcirculatory support with Abiomed in 20 patients over a 4-year period. Fifteenpatients with mean age 58 +/- 6 years experienced postcardiotomy failure andunderwent biventricular assist device (BVAD) implantation (group A), afterelective (n = 9) or after emergency coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) (n =6). Five patients (group B), with mean age 35 +/- 19 years, had an implantationfor other underlying conditions: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (n = 3), myocarditis(n = 1) and primary cardiac allograft failure (n = 1).RESULTS: Of these two groups, eight and two patients respectively neededcardiopulmonary resuscitation before VAD implantation. The mean duration ofsupport in both groups was 5.8 (range 12 h-13 days) and 4.4 days (range 2 h-9days) respectively. Six and two patients could be weaned from the device and nineand one patients respectively, died on the device. Two patients in group Bunderwent successful heart transplantation and four patients in group A diedafter weaning. Two patients in the postcardiotomy group and four patients ingroup B survived (13% and 80%) with an overall survival and discharge rate of30%.CONCLUSION: Although sample sizes are small, better survival rates with emergencyAbiomed BVS 5000 implantation were obtained in the non postcardiotomy group(group B). For patients in the postcardiotomy group, outcome was negativelyinfluenced by cardiac arrest and resuscitation before urgent CABG. Since death isthe only alternative for these patients in cardiogenic shock and organ recoverycannot be predicted, we continue to consider emergency VAD implantation in thispatient population.