: 15511449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1510. Artif Organs. 2004 Nov;28(11):1002-15.A tensor-based measure for estimating blood damage.Arora D(1), Behr M, Pasquali M.Author information: (1)Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Rice University,Houston, TX, USA.Erratum in    Artif Organs. 2012 May;36(5):500.Implantable ventricular assist devices give hope of a permanent clinical solutionto heart failure. These devices, both pulsatile- and continuous-flow, arepresently used as medium-term bridge to heart transplant or recovery. Whilelong-term use of continuous-flow axial and centrifugal pumps is being explored,the excessive level of blood damage in these devices has emerged as a designchallenge. Blood damage depends both on shear stress and exposure time, anddevice designers have relied traditionally on global space- and time-averagedestimates from experimental studies to make design decisions. Measuringdistributions of shear stress levels and the blood cell's exposure to theseconditions in complex rotary pump flow is difficult. On the other hand,computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is now being used as a tool for designingviable devices, offering more detailed information about the flow field. Atensor-based blood damage model for CFD analysis is proposed here. The modelestimates the time- and space-dependent strain experienced by individual bloodcells and correlates it to blood damage data from steady shear flow experiments. The blood cells are modeled as deforming droplets and their deformation istracked along the pathlines of a computed flow. The model predicts that bloodcells in a rapidly fluctuating shear flow can sustain high shear stress levelsfor very short exposure time without deforming considerably. In the context ofmechanical modeling of the implantable Gyro blood pump being developed at Baylor College of Medicine, this suggests that blood cells traversing regions of highly fluctuating shear stress rapidly may not hemolyze significantly.