: 21831658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]752. Circ J. 2011;75(10):2387-96. Epub 2011 Aug 4.Relationship between myocardial redox state and matrix metalloproteinase activityin patients on left ventricular assist device support.Caruso R(1), Caselli C, Boroni C, Campolo J, Milazzo F, Cabiati M, Russo C,Parolini M, Giannessi D, Frigerio M, Parodi O.Author information: (1)CNR Clinical Physiology Institute, Cardiovascular Department, Niguarda CàGranda Hospital Milan, Milan, Italy.BACKGROUND: Redox aminothiols have been reported to modulate the activity ofrecombinant metalloproteinases (MMP). The aim of the present study was toinvestigate the effects of myocardial redox state on the activities of MMP-2 and -9 implicated in cardiac remodeling in end-stage heart failure patients supportedby left ventricular assist device (LVAD).METHODS AND RESULTS: During heart transplant (HT) surgery, myocardial specimens(MS) from right ventricular walls and LV walls were obtained from 7 LVADrecipients (LVAD group, MS n=35) and from 7 stable HT candidates on medicaltherapy (MT group, MS n=35). Myocardial MMP-2 and -9 activities and expression,tissue inhibitor of MMP (TIMP)-1 and -4, transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 and aminothiol concentrations were measured. MMP-2 and -9 activities were evaluatedalso by incubating MS with different amounts of reduced and oxidized glutathione (GSH). MMP-2 and -9 activities and expression were lower in the LVAD group,whereas myocardial TIMP-1 and -4 concentrations were comparable to those of MTpatients. Higher GSH and TGF-β1 concentrations were found in LVAD-recipients.Only GSH concentrations were inversely related to MMP-2 and -9 activities. Invitro, GSH had an inhibitory effect on MMP-2 and -9 activities.CONCLUSIONS: LVAD recipients show reduced myocardial MMP-2 and -9 activities and expression when compared to medically treated patients. Changes of myocardialredox state, predominantly GSH-dependent, appear to modulate MMP-2 and -9activities by an inhibitory effect dependent on thiol content. These data supporta role of GSH cycle in modulating the extracellular matrix in end-stage heartfailure patients supported by LVAD.