: 25034705  [PubMed - in process]147. Crit Care. 2014 May 9;18(3):219. doi: 10.1186/cc13865.Extracorporeal life support devices and strategies for management of acutecardiorespiratory failure in adult patients: a comprehensive review.Shekar K, Mullany DV, Thomson B, Ziegenfuss M, Platts DG, Fraser JF.Evolution of extracorporeal life support (ECLS) technology has added a newdimension to the intensive care management of acute cardiac and/or respiratoryfailure in adult patients who fail conventional treatment. ECLS also complements cardiac surgical and cardiology procedures, implantation of long-term mechanical cardiac assist devices, heart and lung transplantation and cardiopulmonaryresuscitation. Available ECLS therapies provide a range of options to themultidisciplinary teams who are involved in the time-critical care of thesecomplex patients. While venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) canprovide complete respiratory support, extracorporeal carbon dioxide removalfacilitates protective lung ventilation and provides only partial respiratorysupport. Mechanical circulatory support with venoarterial (VA) ECMO employed in atraditional central/peripheral fashion or in a temporary ventricular assistdevice configuration may stabilise patients with decompensated cardiac failurewho have evidence of end-organ dysfunction, allowing time for recovery,decision-making, and bridging to implantation of a long-term mechanicalcirculatory support device and occasionally heart transplantation. In highlyselected patients with combined severe cardiac and respiratory failure, advanced ECLS can be provided with central VA ECMO, peripheral VA ECMO with timelytransition to venovenous ECMO or VA-venous ECMO upon myocardial recovery to avoidupper body hypoxia or by addition of an oxygenator to the temporary ventricularassist device circuit. This article summarises the available ECLS options andprovides insights into the principles and practice of these techniques. Oneshould emphasise that, as is common with many emerging therapies, their optimaluse is currently not backed by quality evidence. This deficiency needs to beaddressed to ensure that the full potential of ECLS can be achieved.PMCID: PMC4057103