: 2230058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2101. J Heart Transplant. 1990 Jul-Aug;9(4):408-14.Treatment of cardiac allograft failure by use of an intraaortic axial flow pump.Frazier OH(1), Macris MP, Wampler RK, Duncan JM, Sweeney MS, Fuqua JM.Author information: (1)Cullen Cardiovascular Surgical Research Laboratories, Texas Heart Institute,Houston 77225.Since April 1988 we have used the Hemopump device, a new means of circulatorysupport, to successfully treat three orthotopic heart transplant recipients with biventricular failure refractory to conventional therapy. The Hemopump device is a 21F catheter-mounted, transvalvular, intraaortic axial flow pump. Power to the pump is percutaneously transmitted from an external electromechanical driveconsole by a flexible drive cable. We first used the pump in a 61-year-old man inwhom severe steroid-resistant rejection developed 28 days after heart transplant,resulting in cardiogenic shock (cardiac index less than 2.0 L/min/m2) despitemaximal inotropic support. In the second case a 49-year-old man with no evidence of pulmonary hypertension sustained cardiac arrest 2 hours after hearttransplant, necessitating open chest massage and emergency cardiopulmonarybypass. The third patient was a 9-year-old boy in whom rejection developed 5months after heart transplant, resulting in congestive heart failure that wasunresponsive to maximal medical therapy. The device was implanted by way of thefemoral artery approach in the first case, the ascending aorta in the second, andthe distal abdominal aorta in the third. Duration of support was 46 hours, 65hours, and 6 days, respectively. Increased blood flow provided by the pump rangedfrom 2 to 4 L/min. No device-related complications, such as hemolysis, infection,or thromboembolic events, occurred. All patients recovered normal heart function and were weaned from the device. The first patient is well after 12 months. Thesecond patient died of metastatic lymphoma at 2 months, and the third died ofPseudomonas pneumonia after 2 weeks.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)