: 15652947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1498. Artif Organs. 2005 Jan;29(1):15-25.Methods of failure and reliability assessment for mechanical heart pumps.Patel SM(1), Allaire PE, Wood HG, Throckmorton AL, Tribble CG, Olsen DB.Author information: (1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,VA 22904, USA. smp7z@virginia.eduArtificial blood pumps are today's most promising bridge-to-recovery (BTR),bridge-to-transplant (BTT), and destination therapy solutions for patientssuffering from intractable congestive heart failure (CHF). Due to an increasedneed for effective, reliable, and safe long-term artificial blood pumps, each newdesign must undergo failure and reliability testing, an important step prior toapproval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), for clinical testing and commercial use. The FDA has established no specific standards orprotocols for these testing procedures and there are only limited recommendationsprovided by the scientific community when testing an overall blood pump systemand individual system components. Product development of any medical device must follow a systematic and logical approach. As the most critical aspects of thedesign phase, failure and reliability assessments aid in the successfulevaluation and preparation of medical devices prior to clinical application. The extent of testing, associated costs, and lengthy time durations to execute these experiments justify the need for an early evaluation of failure and reliability. During the design stages of blood pump development, a failure modes and effectsanalysis (FMEA) should be completed to provide a concise evaluation of theoccurrence and frequency of failures and their effects on the overall supportsystem. Following this analysis, testing of any pump typically involves foursequential processes: performance and reliability testing in simple hydraulic or mock circulatory loops, acute and chronic animal experiments, human erroranalysis, and ultimately, clinical testing. This article presents recommendationsfor failure and reliability testing based on the National Institutes of Health(NIH), Society for Thoracic Surgeons (STS) and American Society for ArtificialInternal Organs (ASAIO), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), theAssociation for Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI), and the BethesdaConference. It further discusses studies that evaluate the failure, reliability, and safety of artificial blood pumps including in vitro and in vivo testing. Adescriptive summary of mechanical and human error studies and methods ofartificial blood pumps is detailed.