: 15631529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1502. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005 Jan;79(1):178-83; discussion 183-4.Back from irreversibility: extracorporeal life support for prolonged cardiacarrest.Massetti M(1), Tasle M, Le Page O, Deredec R, Babatasi G, Buklas D, Thuaudet S,Charbonneau P, Hamon M, Grollier G, Gerard JL, Khayat A.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital, CaenFrance. massetti-m@chu-caen.frBACKGROUND: The survival of patients after prolonged cardiac arrest is stillinadequate. Extracorporeal life support (ECLS) represents an alternativetherapeutic method for patients who do not respond to conventionalcardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation. This technology is used to support thecirculation of a patient with severe cardiac failure.METHODS: Between June 1997 and January 2003, 40 ECLS procedures were performed inpatients who presented with refractory cardiac arrest. During external cardiacmassage, the patient was connected to an extracorporeal circuit by the insertion of an arterial and venous cannula through the femoral vessels. The extracorporealcircuit included a centrifugal pump and an oxygenator. Mean age was 42 +/- 15years; the average time of external cardiac massage was 105 +/- 44 minutes.RESULTS: Once the circulation was restored, 22 patients were disconnected fromthe extracorporeal circulation because of brain death or multiorgan failure;after 24 hours, among the 18 survivors, 6 were weaned off the pump, 9 werebridged to a ventricular assist device, and 2 patients were directly bridged tocardiac transplantation. Eight patients are alive and without any sequelae at 18 month's follow-up.CONCLUSIONS: In prolonged cardiac arrest with failing conventional measures,rescue by extracorporeal support provides an ultimate therapeutic option with agood outcome in survivors. Our results encourage the wider application of ECLSfor refractory cardiocirculatory arrest in selected patients. The high rate ofneurologic death needs further improvements in the early phase of resuscitationmaneuvers.