: 23729752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]433. Eur Heart J. 2013 Aug;34(29):2230-42. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/eht167. Epub 2013May 31.Risk stratification for implantable cardioverter defibrillator therapy: the role of the wearable cardioverter-defibrillator.Klein HU(1), Goldenberg I, Moss AJ.Author information: (1)University of Rochester Medical Center, Heart Research Follow-up Program, Box 653, 265 Crittenden Blvd. Rochester, NY 14620, USA.helmut.klein@heart.rochester.eduThe benefit of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) therapy depends upon appropriate evaluation of a persisting risk of sudden death and estimation of thepatient's overall survival. Assessment of a stable and unchangeablearrhythmogenic substrate is often difficult. Structural abnormality andventricular dysfunction, the two major risk parameters, may recover, and heartfailure symptoms can improve so that ICD therapy may not be indicated. Riskstratification can take time while the patient continues to be at high risk ofarrhythmic death, and patients may need temporary bridging by a defibrillator in cases of interrupted ICD therapy. The wearable cardioverter-defibrillator (WCD)combines a long-term electrocardiogram (ECG)-monitoring system with an externalautomatic defibrillator. The LIfeVest® (ZOLL, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) is composed ofa garment, containing two defibrillation patch electrodes on the back, and anelastic belt with a front-defibrillation patch electrode and four non-adhesiveECG electrodes, connected to a monitoring and defibrillation unit. The WCD is asafe and effective tool to terminate ventricular tachycardia/ventricularfibrillation events, unless a conscious patient withholds shock delivery. It may be used in patients in the early phase after acute myocardial infarction withpoor left ventricular function, after acute coronary revascularization procedures(percutaneous coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting) andreduced left ventricular ejection fraction (≤35%), in patients with acute heartfailure in non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy of uncertain aetiology and prognosis. TheWCD may be helpful in subjects with syncope of assumed tachyarrhythmia origin or in patients with inherited arrhythmia syndromes. The WCD may replace ICDimplantation in patients waiting for heart transplantation or who need aventricular-assist device. This review describes the technical details andcharacteristics of the WCD, discusses its various potential applications, andreports the currently available experience with the wearable defibrillator.