: 24652017  [PubMed - in process]221. Eur J Intern Med. 2014 Jun;25(5):422-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2014.02.006. Epub2014 Mar 16.Current indications for heart transplantation and left ventricular assist device:a practical point of view.Ammirati E(1), Oliva F(2), Cannata A(2), Contri R(3), Colombo T(2), MartinelliL(2), Frigerio M(4).Author information: (1)Cardio-thoracic and Vascular Department, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy; San Raffaele Hospital and Vita-Salute University, Milan, Italy. Electronicaddress: enrico.ammirati@ospedaleniguarda.it. (2)Cardio-thoracic and VascularDepartment, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy. (3)San Raffaele Hospital and Vita-Salute University, Milan, Italy. (4)Cardio-thoracic and VascularDepartment, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy. Electronic address:maria.frigerio@ospedaleniguarda.it.Heart transplantation (HTx) is considered the "gold standard" therapy ofrefractory heart failure (HF), but it is accessible only to few patients because of the paucity of suitable heart donors. On the other hand, left ventricularassist devices (LVADs) have proven to be effective in improving survival andquality of life in patients with refractory HF. The challenge encountered bymultidisciplinary teams in dealing with advanced HF lies in identifying patients who could benefit more from HTx as compared to LVAD implantation and theappropriate timing. The decision-making is based on clinical parameters,imaging-based data and risk scores. Current outcome of HF patients supported byLVAD (2-year survival around 70%) is rapidly improving and leads the way to a newtherapeutic strategy. Patients who have a low likelihood to gain access to theheart graft pool could benefit more from LVAD implantation (defined as bridge to transplantation indication) than from remaining on HTx waiting list with thelikely risk of clinical deterioration or removal from the list because patientsare no longer suitable for transplantation. LVAD has also demonstrated to beeffective in patients who are not considered eligible candidates for HTx with adestination therapy indication. HTx should be reserved to those patients for whomthe maximum clinical benefit can be expected, such as young patients with nocomorbidities. Here we discuss the current listing criteria for HTx andindications to implant of LVAD for patients with refractory acute and chronic HF based on the guidelines and the practical experience of our center.Copyright © 2014 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.