: 21534247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]801. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011 Jul;30(7):805-10. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2011.03.015. Epub 2011 May 4.Osteopontin: a potential biomarker for heart failure and reverse remodeling afterleft ventricular assist device support.Schipper ME(1), Scheenstra MR, van Kuik J, van Wichen DF, van der Weide P,Dullens HF, Lahpor J, de Jonge N, De Weger RA.Author information: (1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, TheNetherlands.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support in end-stage heartfailure (HF) leads to recovery of the patient's condition, size reduction ofcardiomyocytes, and also volume reduction and change in the composition of theextracellular matrix (ECM). Myocardial expression of ECM osteopontin (OPN)protein increases with the severity of HF. We analyzed whether OPN messenger RNA expression in heart tissue and/or OPN protein in plasma are associated withreverse remodeling during LVAD support.METHODS: Plasma and heart tissue specimens of 22 end-stage HF patients before andafter LVAD implantation and subsequent heart transplantation (HTx) were used todetermine the concentrations of OPN protein (EIA) and OPN messenger RNA (mRNA) byquantitative polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situhybridization (ISH) were performed to locate OPN protein and mRNA.RESULTS: The high OPN protein levels in plasma of HF patients did not differsignificantly before and after LVAD support in ischemic heart disease (IHD)(pre-LVAD 167 ± 32 ng/ml; post-LVAD 165 ± 28 ng/ml) and in dilated cardiomyopathy(DCM) (pre-LVAD 99 ± 12 ng/ml; post-LVAD (142 ± 6 ng/ml). The OPN plasma levelsafter HTx decreased to control levels (IHD, 48 ± 6; DCM, 40 ± 5; control, 31 ± 3 ng/ml). In contrast, expression of OPN mRNA in heart biopsy specimens decreasedsignificantly after LVAD support (the relative quantity decreased > 90% in IHDand 50% in DCM). ISH and IHC revealed that OPN was present in cardiomyocytes and in the ECM.CONCLUSIONS: Levels of OPN mRNA in the myocardium of HF patients showed asignificant decrease after LVAD support but OPN protein expression did not. LVAD support only induced a decrease of OPN plasma levels in individual patients,whereas OPN plasma levels reduced significantly in all patients after HTx.Copyright © 2011 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.