: 10800841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1818. J Card Surg. 1999 May-Jun;14(3):218-28.Mechanical circulatory devices for the treatment of heart failure.Mussivand T(1).Author information: (1)The Cardiovascular Devices Division, University of Ottawa Heart Institute,Ontario, Canada.BACKGROUND: During the last four decades substantial efforts have been made inthe development of effective mechanical circulatory devices. Since the firstclinical utilization in the 1960s, the field has gone from the stage of clinical experimentation to that of a valid and effective heart failure treatmentalternative. Experience gained during the short-term use of these devices,typically as a bridge to cardiac transplantation, has led to increasedexpectations of devices capable of long-term or permanent support to be used as apermanent treatment for end-stage heart failure patients. This article reviewsthe history, current state of the art, and future of the field of mechanicalcirculatory devices.METHODS: Mechanical circulatory devices can be classified into three majorcategories: (1) total artificial hearts, (2) pulsatile ventricular assistdevices, and (3) nonpulsatile ventricular assist devices. The most widely useddevices have been the pulsatile ventricular assist devices with more than 5,800reported cases, whereas the use of total artificial hearts has been limited toless than 350 reported cases. Nonpulsatile devices have been used clinically, butonly in short-term cases (i.e., hours and days), whereas the pulsatile deviceshave been used in the long-term application, with patients supported for weeks,months, and in a small number of cases, years. The technological evolution ofthese devices has gone from large, extracorporeal systems designed to keep thepatient alive in the intensive care unit (ICU) until a donor organ could befound, to portable devices that allow the patient to be mobilized outside of the hospital setting.RESULTS: The clinical experience with mechanical circulatory devices as a bridge to cardiac transplantation has saved the lives of thousands of patients. Excitingnew research discoveries related to recovery of native heart function duringextended circulatory support have provided new hope for many more patients.Additional research efforts currently underway are being tested at variouslaboratories around the world and will soon provide the next generation ofsystems. These new systems will offer the recipients an unparalleled quality oflife with minimal limitations on daily activities. The progress in this field hasreached the point where circulatory support will soon be considered a validlong-term or permanent therapy and an elective to transplantation.