: 21751735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]766. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Sep;51(3):390-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.06.018. Epub 2011 Jun 29.Adult human heart slices are a multicellular system suitable forelectrophysiological and pharmacological studies.Camelliti P(1), Al-Saud SA, Smolenski RT, Al-Ayoubi S, Bussek A, Wettwer E,Banner NR, Bowles CT, Yacoub MH, Terracciano CM.Author information: (1)Heart Science Centre, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial CollegeLondon, UK. p.camelliti@imperial.ac.ukElectrophysiological and pharmacological data from the human heart are limiteddue to the absence of simple but representative experimental model systems ofhuman myocardium. The aim of this study was to establish and characterise adulthuman myocardial slices from small patients' heart biopsies as a simple,reproducible and relevant preparation suitable for the study of human cardiactissue at the multicellular level. Vibratome-cut myocardial slices were prepared from left ventricular biopsies obtained from end-stage heart failure patientsundergoing heart transplant or ventricular assist device implantation, and fromhearts of normal dogs. Multiple slices were prepared from each biopsy. Regularcontractility was observed at a range of stimulation frequencies (0.1-2 Hz), and stable electrical activity, monitored using multi-electrode arrays (MEA), wasmaintained for at least 8 h from slice preparation. ATP/ADP andphosphocreatine/creatine ratios were comparable to intact organ values, andmorphology and gap junction distribution were representative of nativemyocardium. MEA recordings showed that field potential duration (FPD) andconduction velocity (CV) in human and dog slices were similar to the valuespreviously reported for papillary muscles, ventricular wedges and whole hearts.Longitudinal CV was significantly faster than transversal CV, with an anisotropicratio of 3:1 for human and 2.3:1 for dog slices. Importantly, slices responded tothe application of E-4031, chromanol and 4-aminopyridine, three potassium channelblockers known to affect action potential duration, with an increase in FPD. Weconclude that viable myocardial slices with preserved structural, biochemical andelectrophysiological properties can be prepared from adult human and canine heartbiopsies and offer a novel preparation suitable for the study of heart failureand drug screening.Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.