: 2665894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2136. J Heart Transplant. 1989 Mar-Apr;8(2):116-23.Bridging to heart transplantation with circulatory support devices.Pennington DG(1), McBride LR, Kanter KR, Miller LW, Ruzevich SA, Naunheim K,Swartz MT, Termuhlen D.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, St. Louis University, Missouri 63104.Several devices are currently available for bridging to cardiac transplantation, but the efficacy of each has not been established. From September 1983 to March1988 we supported 17 transplant candidates with mechanical assist devices.Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was used to bridge two patients,external ventricular assist devices (VADs) were used in 11 patients, internalleft ventricular assist systems (LVAS) were used in three patients, andimplantable prosthetic replacement ventricles (TAH) were used in one patient. The14 men and three women, aged 24 to 59 years (mean 46 years), suffered cardiogenicshock caused by ischemic (13 patients), postpartum (two patients), viral (onepatient), and drug-induced (one patient) cardiomyopathy. Five patients withisolated left ventricular failure (LVF) received only left VADs, three patientswith severe LVF and moderate right ventricular failure received LVAS, and ninepatients with severe biventricular failure received ECMO (two patients),biventricular assist devices (six patients), and TAH (one patient). Patients weresupported for periods of 1/2 to 90 days (mean 22) with flows of 2.15 to 3.39L/min/m2. Ten patients underwent transplantation (eight of whom were discharged) and seven patients died without transplants. The two patients who received ECMOdied 1 and 30 days after transplantation, in part as a result of ECMOcomplications. Seven patients were denied transplants because of renal failure(five patients), infection (five patients), bleeding (four patients), andcerebrovascular accident (two patients). The seven survivors were supported with VADs (five patients) or LVAS (two patients). Three had driveline infections, two had bleeding complications, two developed mediastinitis, and one each hadhemolysis, cerebrovascular accident, and mechanical failure.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATEDAT 250 WORDS)