: 19095833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1138. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Jul 15;46(14):1073-5.[Mechanical circulation support as emergency bridging for heart transplantation].[Article in Chinese]Luo XJ(1), Hu SS, Sun HS, Song YH, Xu JP, Liu P, Zhang Y, Zheng Z.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Fu Wai Hospital, Chinese Academy ofMedical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.luoxinjin@yahoo.comOBJECTIVE: To investigate the experience of patients in acute cardiogenic shockrequired insertion of mechanical circulation support devices (MCS) beforeundergoing standard pretransplant evaluations.METHODS: From February 2005 to August 2007, 10 patients including 7 male and 3female required emergency bridging placement of MCS. Average age was (40 +/-16.2) years old. Mean body weight was (70.8 +/- 18.1) kg. There were 5 patientsof dilated cardiomyopathy, 2 patients of arrhythmic right ventricularcardiomyopathy, 2 patients of ischemic cardiomyopathy and 1 patient of end-stage valvular heart disease. All patients were accompanied with acute decompensationof congestive heart failure. Before implantation of MCS, all patients receivedtreatment of three or more inotropic drugs at maximal dosages, 6 patientssuffered from ventricular tachycardia, 4 patients required cardio-pulmonaryresuscitation treatment and 3 patients suffered from definite function defect of liver and kidney. MCS included ECMO for 8 patients, BVS5000 and MEDOS for 1patient respectively.RESULTS: The duration of MCS supporting was 3 to 44 d with a mean of (11.5 +/-13.9) d. Four patients were successfully supported for getting hearttransplantation, 1 patient received kidney transplantation simultaneously. Twopatients recovered from acute heart failure, discharged and remained on regularheart transplantation list. One patient died from cerebral embolism after 44days' support and 1 died from multiple organ failure after 3 days' support.Because of severe infection, MCS treatment of 2 patients was terminated ahead of schedule by their family and the patients were lost finally.CONCLUSIONS: The use of MCS devices for acute catastrophic situation appearswarranted despite the abbreviated transplant evaluations. It is important forimproving the outcomes with beginning MCS support before multiple organ systemfailure occurs, and accurately identifying individuals who can benefit from MCS.