: 20118395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1003. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Feb;29(2):209-15. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2009.11.599.Effects of the HeartMate II continuous-flow left ventricular assist device onright ventricular function.Lee S(1), Kamdar F, Madlon-Kay R, Boyle A, Colvin-Adams M, Pritzker M, John R.Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Minnesota,Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.BACKGROUND: Continuous-flow devices have become the standard of care formechanical circulatory support for end-stage heart failure patients because ofimproved survival and durability. The effects of these devices, such as theHeartMate II (HMII) left ventricular assist device (LVAD), on right ventricular(RV) function have not been evaluated in detail. This study evaluated theincidence of RV failure, alterations in RV function, severity of tricuspidregurgitation (TR), and cardiac hemodynamics after HMII implantation.METHODS: Echocardiograms (n = 22) and right heart catheterizations (n = 40) were performed before and after 4 to 6 months of HMII support in 40bridge-to-transplant patients. Right heart failure was defined as the requirementfor inotropes and/or nitric oxide requirement after LVAD implantation for >14days or the need for right-sided mechanical circulatory support.RESULTS: Overall, RV failure after HMII implantation occurred in 2 of 40 patients(5%). Significant improvements occurred in cardiac index, with reductions inright atrial pressure, RV stroke work index, tricuspid annular motion, meanpulmonary artery pressure, and pulmonary vascular resistance after HMII support. There was a trend towards reduction in TR after LVAD support (p = 0.075).CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of RV failure after support with continuous-flowdevices such as the HMII is low. The favorable effects of the HMII on cardiachemodynamics result in improved RV function, improved right- and left-sidedhemodynamic profiles, and a reduction in TR severity. These findings may haveimportant implications for LVAD patients needing longer-term support.