: 9576228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1892. Cardiology. 1998 Mar;89(3):184-8.Low serum cholesterol levels predict high perioperative mortality in patientssupported by a left-ventricular assist system.Richartz BM(1), Radovancevic B, Frazier OH, Vaughn WK, Taegtmeyer H.Author information: (1)St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Texas Heart Institute, and Department ofInternal Medicine, University of Texas-Houston Medical School, 77030, USA.BACKGROUND: Although the use of a left-ventricular assist system (LVAS) provides circulatory support for end-stage heart failure patients awaiting hearttransplantation, this procedure is accompanied by a relatively high perioperativemortality. The aim of this retrospective study was to identify those patientspreoperatively which have the highest perioperative mortality.METHODS AND RESULTS: Forty-five consecutive patients undergoing LVAS implantationwere evaluated for preoperative risk factors, including body mass index,hemodynamic data, and blood chemistry studies by multivariate analysis. They weredivided into (1) patients who were successfully transplanted (n = 25) and (2)patients who died before transplantation (n = 20). The nonsurvivors weresubclassified into patients who died within 14 days after surgery (n = 11) andpatients who died after 2 weeks of device implantation (n = 9). Hemodynamicparameters were the same in both groups, but total cholesterol was significantly lower in the nonsurvivors than in the survivors (90 +/- 7 vs. 144 +/- 8 mg/dl,respectively, p < 0.0001). The sensitivity of predicting perioperative death witha serum cholesterol below 100 mg/dl was 100%, the specificity of predictingsurvival with a serum cholesterol above 120 mg/dl was 87%.CONCLUSION: In this small retrospective study, there was a correlation betweentotal cholesterol levels and survival of patients with advanced heart failure on mechanical support. A cholesterol level below 100 mg/dl was accompanied by a highperioperative mortality. In contrast, a cholesterol level above 120 mg/dl wasaccompanied by a 87% chance of survival. The results suggest a predictive valueof cholesterol which is independent of the hemodynamic status.