: 19416768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1098. PLoS Pathog. 2009 May;5(5):e1000411. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000411. Epub 2009May 1.SdrF, a Staphylococcus epidermidis surface protein, contributes to the initiationof ventricular assist device driveline-related infections.Arrecubieta C(1), Toba FA, von Bayern M, Akashi H, Deng MC, Naka Y, Lowy FD.Author information: (1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, College of Physiciansand Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.Staphylococcus epidermidis remains the predominant pathogen in prosthetic-device infections. Ventricular assist devices, a recently developed form of therapy for end-stage congestive heart failure, have had considerable success. However,infections, most often caused by Staphylococcus epidermidis, have limited theirlong-term use. The transcutaneous driveline entry site acts as a potential portalof entry for bacteria, allowing development of either localized or systemicinfections. A novel in vitro binding assay using explanted drivelines obtainedfrom patients undergoing transplantation and a heterologous lactococcal system ofsurface protein expression were used to identify S. epidermidis surfacecomponents involved in the pathogenesis of driveline infections. Of the fourcomponents tested, SdrF, SdrG, PIA, and GehD, SdrF was identified as the primary ligand. SdrF adherence was mediated via its B domain attaching to host collagendeposited on the surface of the driveline. Antibodies directed against SdrFreduced adherence of S. epidermidis to the drivelines. SdrF was also found toadhere with high affinity to Dacron, the hydrophobic polymeric outer surface ofdrivelines. Solid phase binding assays showed that SdrF was also able to adhereto other hydrophobic artificial materials such as polystyrene. A murine model of infection was developed and used to test the role of SdrF during in vivodriveline infection. SdrF alone was able to mediate bacterial adherence toimplanted drivelines. Anti-SdrF antibodies reduced S. epidermidis colonization ofimplanted drivelines. SdrF appears to play a key role in the initiation ofventricular assist device driveline infections caused by S. epidermidis. Thispluripotential adherence capacity provides a potential pathway to infection with SdrF-positive commensal staphylococci first adhering to the externalDacron-coated driveline at the transcutaneous entry site, then spreading alongthe collagen-coated internal portion of the driveline to establish a localizedinfection. This capacity may also have relevance for other prostheticdevice-related infections.PMCID: PMC2670519