: 21884959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]742. Am Heart J. 2011 Sep;162(3):425-35.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2011.05.026. Epub 2011 Jul 30.Berlin Heart EXCOR Pediatric ventricular assist device Investigational DeviceExemption study: study design and rationale.Almond CS(1), Buchholz H, Massicotte P, Ichord R, Rosenthal DN, Uzark K, Jaquiss RD, Kroslowitz R, Kepler MB, Lobbestael A, Bellinger D, Blume ED, Fraser CD Jr,Bartlett RH, Thiagarajan R, Jenkins K.Author information: (1)The Cardiology Clinical Research and Regulatory Group, Department ofCardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,USA. christopher.almond@cardio.hchboston.orgBACKGROUND: Currently, there are no Food and Drug Administration-approved devicesavailable that can provide long-term mechanical circulatory support to smallerchildren with severe heart failure as a bridge to heart transplant (HT). Inrecent years, the Berlin Heart EXCOR Pediatric ventricular assist device (VAD)has emerged as a potential treatment option. Systematic data on the safety andefficacy of the EXCOR are limited.METHODS: The Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) clinical study is designed toevaluate the safety and probable benefit of the EXCOR to support regulatoryreview of the device under the Humanitarian Device Exemption regulation. Thestudy design and rationale are reviewed in light of the well-described challengesinherent in small population studies.RESULTS: The Berlin Heart EXCOR IDE clinical study is a prospective, multicenter,single-arm, clinical cohort study. Children aged 0 to 16 years with severe heart failure (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Supportprofile 1 or 2) due to 2-ventricle heart disease and actively listed for HTcomprise the primary study cohort. The control population is a propensity-matchedretrospective cohort of children supported with extracorporeal membraneoxygenation, the only bridge device available to smaller children before theEXCOR. The primary efficacy end point is survival to heart transplantation orrecovery. The primary safety end point is the incidence of serious adverse eventsas defined by pediatric Interagency Registry for Mechanically AssistedCirculatory Support criteria. The study will enroll a total of 48 subjects in 2cohorts based on body surface area (cohort 1 <0.7 m(2), cohort 2 0.7-1.5 m(2))and is powered to show safety superiority to a prespecified performance goal of0.25 serious adverse events per day of support. Children ineligible for theprimary cohort will still have access to the device in a third compassionate-use cohort where adverse event data will be collected for additional safetycharacterization of the device.CONCLUSION: The Berlin Heart IDE clinical study will be the first bridge-to-HTVAD study designed exclusively for children. It is anticipated that the studywill provide important information on the safety and efficacy of the Berlin HeartEXCOR Pediatric in children while providing valuable lessons into the design and conduct of future VAD studies in children.Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.