: 10567308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1832. Circulation. 1999 Nov 9;100(19 Suppl):II216-23.Myocardial gene expression of regulators of myocyte apoptosis and myocyte calciumhomeostasis during hemodynamic unloading by ventricular assist devices inpatients with end-stage heart failure.Bartling B(1), Milting H, Schumann H, Darmer D, Arusoglu L, Koerner MM,El-Banayosy A, Koerfer R, Holtz J, Zerkowski HR.Author information: (1)Institute of Pathophysiology, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg,Halle/Saale, Germany. babett.bartling@medizin.uni-halle.deBACKGROUND: In patients with end-stage heart failure, characterized by anincreased susceptibility to cardiomyocyte apoptosis and a labile cardiomyocytecalcium homeostasis, a ventricular assist device (VAD) is implanted for bridging to cardiac transplantation and results in myocardial unloading. Althoughphenotype changes in the failing heart are assumed to result from hemodynamicoverload, the reversibility of these changes under unloading is unknown.METHODS AND RESULTS: By use of quantitative reverse-transcription polymerasechain reaction, mRNA expression analyses were performed on left ventricularspecimens obtained from 10 nonfailing donor hearts (from 8 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and 2 patients with coronary heart disease) at the time of VADimplantation and 36 to 169 days later during VAD removal with subsequent cardiac transplantation. In terminally failing hearts before VAD support, leftventricular mRNA analyses revealed increased Pro-ANP, reduced antiapoptoticBcl-x(L) and antiapoptotic Fas isoform FasExo6Del, and a decreased ratio ofsarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase per sarcolemmal Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger incomparison with nonfailing ventricles. After VAD unloading, ventriculartranscription of Pro-ANP was immediately normalized, and apoptotic DNAfragmentation was attenuated. In patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, mRNAs ofBcl-x(L) and FasExo6Del/Fas were enhanced depending on time on VAD. The Bcl-x(L) mRNA level correlated positively with that of the Bcl-x(L) protein. Transcriptionof sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase/Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger demonstratedrecovery in only 4 of 10 patients.CONCLUSIONS: Mechanical support of the failing heart induces a time-dependentchange in myocardial gene expression compatible with a decreased susceptibilityto apoptosis.