: 18293722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1232. Cardiol Young. 2007 Sep;17 Suppl 2:104-15. doi: 10.1017/S1047951107001217.Cardiac extracorporeal life support: state of the art in 2007.Cooper DS(1), Jacobs JP, Moore L, Stock A, Gaynor JW, Chancy T, Parpard M,Griffin DA, Owens T, Checchia PA, Thiagarajan RR, Spray TL, Ravishankar C.Author information: (1)The Congenital Heart Institute of Florida, All Children's Hospital, Universityof South Florida College of Medicine, Florida Pediatric Associates and CardiacSurgical Associates, Saint Petersburg, Florida 33701, USA.davidscooper@verizon.netMechanical circulatory support is an invaluable tool in the care of children withsevere refractory cardiac and or pulmonary failure. Two forms of mechanicalcirculatory support are currently available to neonates, infants, and smallerchildren, namely extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and use of a ventricularassist device, with each technique having unique advantages and disadvantages.The intra-aortic balloon pump is a third form of mechanical support that has beensuccessfully used in larger children, adolescents, and adults, but has limitedapplicability in smaller children. In this review, we discuss the currentexperiences with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and ventricular assistdevices in children with cardiac disease.A variety of forms of mechanicalcirculatory support are available for children with cardiopulmonary dysfunctionrefractory to conventional management. These devices require extensive resources,both human and economic. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation can be effectivelyused in a variety of settings to provide support to critically-ill patients with cardiac disease. Careful selection of patients and timing of intervention remainschallenging. Special consideration should be given to children with cardiacdisease with regard to anatomy, physiology, cannulation, and circuit management. Even though exciting progress is being made in the development of ventricularassist devices for long-term mechanical support in children, extracorporealmembrane oxygenation remains the mainstay of mechanical circulatory support inchildren with complex anatomy, particularly those needing rapid resuscitation andthose with a functionally univentricular circulation.As the familiarity andexperience with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation has grown, new indicationshave evolved, including emergent resuscitation. This utilization has been termed extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The literature supporting emergent cardiopulmonary support is mounting. Reasonable survival rates have been achievedafter initiation of support during active compressions of the chest followingin-hospital cardiac arrest. Due to the limitations of conventional circuits forextracorporeal membrane oxygenation, some centres have developed novel systemsfor rapid cardiopulmonary support. Many centres previously considered afunctionally univentricular circulation to be a contraindication toextracorporeal membrane oxygenation, but improved results have been achievedrecently with this complex subset of patients. The registry of the ExtracorporealLife Support Organization recently reported the outcome of extracorporeal lifesupport used in neonates for cardiac indications from 1996 to 2000. Of the 740neonates who were placed on extracorporeal life support for cardiac indications, 118 had hypoplastic left heart syndrome. There was no significant difference insurvival between these patients and those with other defects. It is now common touse extracorporeal membrane oxygenation to support patients with a functionallyuniventricular circulation, and reasonable survival rates are to be expected.Although extracorporeal membrane oxygenation has become a standard of care formany paediatric centres, its use is limited to those patients who require onlyshort-term cardiopulmonary support. Mechanical ventricular assist devices havebecome standard therapy for adults with cardiac failure refractory to maximalmedical management. Several devices are readily available in the United States ofAmerica for adults, but there are fewer options available to children. Over thelast few years, substantial progress has been made in paediatric mechanicalsupport. Ventricular assist devices are being used with increasing frequency inchildren with cardiac failure refractory to medical therapy for primary treatmentas a long-term bridge to recovery or transplantation. The paracorporeal,pneumatic, pulsatile "Berlin Heart" ventricular assist device is being used with increasing frequency in Europe and North America to provide univentricular andbiventricular support. With this device, a patient can be maintained onmechanical circulatory support while extubated, being mobilized, and feeding bymouth. Mechanical circulatory support should be anticipated, and every attemptmust be made to initiate support "urgently" rather than "emergently", before the presence of dysfunction of end organs or circulatory collapse. In an emergency,these patients can be resuscitated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation andsubsequently transitioned to a long-term ventricular assist device after a periodof stability.