: 25431733  [PubMed]86. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2015 Feb;38(2):275-81. doi: 10.1111/pace.12535. Epub 2014 Nov 27.A pilot study to assess benefit of atrial rhythm control after cardiacresynchronization therapy and atrioventricular node ablation.Schwartzman D(1), Housel D, Bazaz R, Jain S, Saba S, Gorcsan J 3rd, Adelstein E.Author information: (1)Heart, Lung and Vascular Medicine Institute, University of Pittsburgh,Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is frequently comorbid in patients receivingcardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT), and suppression is typically difficult. Herein, we sought to understand the benefit of atrial rhythm control in thesetting of ventricular rate and regularity control induced by atrioventricularnode (AVN) ablation.METHODS: Fifty-two patients with heart failure, persistent AF, left ventricular(LV) ejection fraction <35%, and left bundle branch block underwent cardiacresynchronization therapy (CRT) + AVN ablation, and were randomized to one of thefollowing groups: (1) Atrial Rhythm Control (ARC); (2) AF. Patients weresubsequently followed for up to 1 year.RESULTS: Similar numbers of patients in each group were lost to follow-up or havewithdrawn (ARC two; AF three). Rhythm control in four patients in the ARC groupwas inadequate. Among the remaining patients, the incidence of death (ARC=1,AF=2) or left ventricular assist device +/- transplantation (ARC=2, AF=1) weresimilar. Among the remaining patients (ARC 16, AF 19), at 1 year, there were nosignificant differences in CRT response rate, Minnesota Living with Heart Failuresurvey score, 6-minute hall walk distance, ventricular tachyarrhythmiaoccurrence, or LV dimensions. A significantly higher hospital encounter rateamong ARC patients was attributable to efforts to maintain uniform atrial rhythm.CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study, no incremental benefit for ARC was apparent. A larger study will be necessary to adequately examine these issues.© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.