: 19233673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1120. Eur Heart J. 2009 Apr;30(7):805-12. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehp012. Epub 2009 Feb 17.The impact of left ventricular assist device-induced left ventricular unloadingon the myocardial renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system: therapeutic consequences?Klotz S(1), Burkhoff D, Garrelds IM, Boomsma F, Danser AH.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University HospitalMuenster, Germany.AIMS: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-Is) prevent the rise inmyocardial angiotensin II that occurs after left ventricular assist device (LVAD)implantation, but do not fully normalize cardiac function. Here, we determinedthe effect of LVAD implantation, with or without ACE-Is, on cardiac renin,aldosterone, and norepinephrine, since these hormones, like angiotensin II, arelikely determinants of myocardial recovery during LVAD support.METHODS AND RESULTS: Biochemical measurements were made in paired LV myocardialsamples obtained from 20 patients before and after LVAD support in patients with and without ACE-I therapy. Pre-LVAD renin levels were 100x normal and resulted inalmost complete cardiac angiotensinogen depletion. In non-ACE-I users, LVADsupport, by normalizing blood pressure, reversed this situation. Cardiacaldosterone decreased in parallel with cardiac renin, in agreement with theconcept that cardiac aldosterone is blood-derived. Cardiac norepinephrineincreased seven-fold, possibly due to the rise in angiotensin II.Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy prevented these changes: reninand aldosterone remained high, and no increase in norepinephrine occurred.CONCLUSION: Although LV unloading lowers renin and aldosterone, it allows cardiacangiotensin generation to increase and thus to activate the sympathetic nervoussystem. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors prevent the latter, but do notaffect aldosterone. Thus, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist therapy duringLVAD support may play a role in further promoting recovery.