: 16966844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1359. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2006 Sep;25(9):1091-8. Epub 2006 Aug 2.Reverse remodeling of the myocardial extracellular matrix after prolonged leftventricular assist device support follows a biphasic pattern.Bruggink AH(1), van Oosterhout MF, de Jonge N, Ivangh B, van Kuik J, Voorbij RH, Cleutjens JP, Gmelig-Meyling FH, de Weger RA.Author information: (1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, TheNetherlands. a.h.bruggink@lab.azu.nlBACKGROUND: Collagens are important components of the extracellular matrix (ECM).Alterations in collagen structure and composition can lead to end-stage heartfailure. Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are frequently used as a bridge to heart transplantation (HTx). In this study, we analyzed changes in compositionof the collagens as well as the synthesis or degradation of these collagens afterprolonged LVAD support.METHODS: The ECM volume was quantified after Picro-Sirius red staining. Withimmunohistochemistry (IHC), Type I and Type III collagen proteins were analyzedand, using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR), collagen mRNA expressionwas analyzed. Collagen synthesis and degradation was studied by measuringN-terminal pro-peptide for Type I collagen (PINP), N-terminal pro-peptide forType III collagen (PIIINP) and carboxyterminal telopeptide for Type I collagen(ICTP) in plasma. Collagen composition was measured using thehydroxyproline/Sircol assay.RESULTS: The ECM volume increased in the first 200 days after LVAD implantation. At between 200 and 400 days the ECM volume decreased, but remained higher thanpre-LVAD. After 400 days the ECM volume was smaller than the pre-LVAD volume. IHCdid not show a significant difference pre- and post-LVAD for collagencomposition. Collagen mRNA expression did not change but an augmented synthesisof collagen during the first month after LVAD support was detected uponmeasurement of plasma PINP and PIIINP levels. In addition, the quality of thecollagen network improved.CONCLUSIONS: Reverse remodeling during LVAD support follows a biphasic pattern.Initially, an increase in Type I and Type III collagen turnover occurs, which is paralleled by a volume increase of the ECM. Subsequently, this turnover decreasesas ECM volume decreases, which results in a restoration of the collagen network.