: 23868955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]390. Perfusion. 2014 Jan;29(1):82-8. doi: 10.1177/0267659113496580. Epub 2013 Jul 18.Total artificial heart in the pediatric patient with biventricular heart failure.Park SS(1), Sanders DB, Smith BP, Ryan J, Plasencia J, Osborn MB, Wellnitz CM,Southard RN, Pierce CN, Arabia FA, Lane J, Frakes D, Velez DA, Pophal SG, NigroJJ.Author information: (1)1Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Division of Cardiology, Division ofCritical Care Medicine, Children's Heart Center, Division of Radiology, PhoenixChildren's Hospital, Phoenix, AZ, USA.Mechanical circulatory support emerged for the pediatric population in the late1980s as a bridge to cardiac transplantation. The Total Artificial Heart (TAH-t) (SynCardia Systems Inc., Tuscon, AZ) has been approved for compassionate use bythe Food and Drug Administration for patients with end-stage biventricular heart failure as a bridge to heart transplantation since 1985 and has had FDA approval since 2004. However, of the 1,061 patients placed on the TAH-t, only 21 (2%) wereunder the age 18. SynCardia Systems, Inc. recommends a minimum patient bodysurface area (BSA) of 1.7 m(2), thus, limiting pediatric application of thisdevice. This unique case report shares this pediatric institution's firstexperience with the TAH-t. A 14-year-old male was admitted with dilatedcardiomyopathy and severe biventricular heart failure. The patient rapidlydecompensated, requiring extracorporeal life support. An echocardiogram revealed severe biventricular dysfunction and diffuse clot formation in the left ventricleand outflow tract. The decision was made to transition to biventricular assistdevice. The biventricular failure and clot formation helped guide the team to theTAH-t, in spite of a BSA (1.5 m(2)) below the recommendation of 1.7 m(2). Acomputed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, in conjunction with a novelthree-dimensional (3D) modeling system and team, assisted in determiningappropriate fit. Chest CT and 3D modeling following implantation were utilized todetermine all major vascular structures were unobstructed and the bronchi wereopen. The virtual 3D model confirmed appropriate device fit with no evidence ofcompression to the left pulmonary veins. The postoperative course was complicatedby a left lung opacification. The left lung anomalies proved to be atelectasisand improved with aggressive recruitment maneuvers. The patient was supported for11 days prior to transplantation. Chest CT and 3D modeling were crucial inassessing whether the device would fit, as well as postoperative complications inthis smaller pediatric patient.