: 19764860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1049. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2009 Dec;32 Suppl 1:S313-9. doi: 10.1007/s10545-009-1262-1. Epub 2009 Sep 7.Cardiomyopathy in the congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG): a case of latepresentation and literature review.Footitt EJ(1), Karimova A, Burch M, Yayeh T, Dupré T, Vuillaumier-Barrot S,Chantret I, Moore SE, Seta N, Grunewald S.Author information: (1)Metabolic Medicine Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children with UCLInstitute of Child Health, London, UK. efootitt@hotmail.co.ukThe congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a recently described group ofinherited multisystem disorders characterized by defects predominantly of N- and O-glycosylation of proteins. Cardiomyopathy in CDG has previously been described in several subtypes; it is usually associated with high morbidity and mortalityand the majority of cases present in the first 2 years of life. This is the firstcase with presentation in late childhood and the article reviews currentliterature. An 11-year-old female with a background of learning difficultiespresented in cardiac failure secondary to severe dilated cardiomyopathy. Prior tothe diagnosis of CDG, her condition deteriorated; she required mechanical support(Excor Berlin Heart) and was listed for cardiac transplant. Investigationsincluded screening for glycosylation disorders, and isoelectric focusing oftransferrin revealed an abnormal type 1 pattern. Analysis of phosphomannomutaseand phosphomannose isomerase showed normal enzyme activity, excluding PMM2 (CDGIa) and MPI (CDG Ib). Lipid-linked oligosaccharide and mutational studies havenot yet defined the defect. Despite aggressive therapy there were persistentdifficulties achieving adequate anticoagulation and she developed multiplelife-threatening thrombotic complications. She was removed from the transplantlist and died from overwhelming sepsis 5 weeks following admission. This caseemphasizes the need to screen all children with an undiagnosed cardiomyopathy forCDG, regardless of age, and where possible to exclude CDG before the use ofcardiac bridging devices. It highlights the many practical and ethical challengesthat may be encountered where clinical knowledge and experience are stillevolving.