: 20207168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]985. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Jun;29(6):603-9. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2010.01.010.Epub 2010 Mar 4.Reversal of impaired myocardial beta-adrenergic receptor signaling bycontinuous-flow left ventricular assist device support.Akhter SA(1), D'Souza KM, Malhotra R, Staron ML, Valeroso TB, Fedson SE, AndersonAS, Raman J, Jeevanandam V.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Section of Cardiac and Thoracic Surgery, University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.sakhter@surgery.bsd.uchicago.eduBACKGROUND: Myocardial beta-adrenergic receptor (beta-AR) signaling is severelyimpaired in chronic heart failure (HF). This study was conducted to determine if left ventricular (LV) beta-AR signaling could be restored after continuous-flowLV assist device (LVAD) support.METHODS: Twelve patients received LVADs as a bridge to transplant. Paired LVbiopsy specimens were obtained at the time of LVAD implant (HF group) andtransplant (LVAD group). The mean duration of LVAD support was 152 +/- 34 days.Myocardial beta-AR signaling was assessed by measuring adenylyl cyclase (AC)activity, total beta-AR density (B(max)), and G protein-coupled receptor kinase-2(GRK2) expression and activity. LV specimens from 8 non-failing hearts (NF) were used as controls.RESULTS: Basal and isoproterenol-stimulated AC activity was significantly lowerin HF vs NF, indicative of beta-AR uncoupling. Continuous-flow LVAD supportrestored basal and isoproterenol-stimulated AC activity to levels similar to NF. B(max) was decreased in HF vs NF and increased to nearly normal in the LVADgroup. GRK2 expression was increased 2.6-fold in HF vs NF and was similar to NFafter LVAD support. GRK2 activity was 3.2-fold greater in HF vs NF and decreased to NF levels in the LVAD group.CONCLUSIONS: Myocardial beta-AR signaling can be restored to nearly normal after continuous-flow LVAD support. This is similar to previous data forvolume-displacement pulsatile LVADs. Decreased GRK2 activity is an importantmechanism and indicates that normalization of the neurohormonal milieu associatedwith HF is similar between continuous-flow and pulsatile LVADs. This may haveimportant implications for myocardial recovery.Copyright 2010 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC2876229