: 9257259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1917. ASAIO J. 1997 Jul-Aug;43(4):365-9.Left ventricular assist device support of medically unresponsive pulmonaryhypertension and aortic insufficiency.Adamson RM(1), Dembitsky WP, Jaski BE, Daily PO, Moreno R, Kim JC, Sono J,Akasaka T, Hoagland PM, Gordon JB.Author information: (1)Sharp Memorial Hospital, San Diego, California, USA.Most centers consider medically unresponsive pulmonary hypertension an absolutecontraindication to orthotopic cardiac transplantation because the alternativesurgical therapy, heterotopic graft placement, is associated with decreasedsurvival, although most patients normalize their pulmonary hemodynamicspostoperatively. Orthotopic transplantation in patients with elevated, butresponsive pulmonary pressures, also is associated with an increased operativemortality rate and decreased long-term survival. The authors present the case of a patient with medically unresponsive pulmonary hypertension who was mechanicallysupported in an effort to improve his orthotopic transplant candidacy anddecrease his risk. After informed consent, a HeartMate left ventricular assistdevice (LVAD) was inserted and the pulmonary hemodynamic response was monitored. Immediately before LVAD insertion, the pulmonary artery pressure (PA) was 74/28mmHg with a transpulmonary gradient (TPG) of 28 mmHg, and a pulmonary vascularresistance (PVR) of 6.6 Wood units, despite prolonged dobutamine, milrinone, and prostaglandin E1 infusions. After 10 weeks of LVAD support, pressure andresistance improved; pulmonary artery pressure was 28/15 mmHg, transpulmonarygradient was 15 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance was 2.8 Wood units. This patient subsequently underwent an uneventful orthotopic heart transplant. At 1year after transplantation, pulmonary artery hemodynamics were normal (PA 34/14mmHg, TPG at 8 mmHg, and PVR at 1.5 Wood units). The authors recommend theconsideration of LVAD placement in patients with medically unresponsive pulmonaryartery hypertension to assess PA responsiveness and improve the patient'sorthotopic cardiac transplant candidacy and decrease the operative risk. However,several weeks may be needed for normalization of pressure and resistance.