: 19416786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1097. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2009 May;28(5):423-7. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.01.013.Epub 2009 Mar 19.Assessment of arterial blood pressure during support with an axial flow leftventricular assist device.Myers TJ(1), Bolmers M, Gregoric ID, Kar B, Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiopulmonary Transplantation and the Center for CardiacSupport, Texas Heart Institute at St Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.BACKGROUND: Axial-flow left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) have a number ofadvantages over pulsatile LVADs, including their small size and betterdurability. Although the design of axial-flow pumps should result in fewerserious complications during support, some adverse events persist. Thus,optimizing patient treatment may minimize complications, allowing broaderacceptance of these devices. In this study, we analyzed standard blood pressuremeasurements obtained by cuff and arterial lines and used these values to helpestablish guidelines for the safe operation of axial-flow LVADs.METHODS: The study included 35 heart failure patients who had received a Jarvik2000 (Jarvik Heart Inc, New York, NY) axial-flow LVAD as a bridge to cardiactransplantation. Blood pressure and echocardiographic data were collected during speed-change studies.RESULTS: Systolic blood pressure did not change, but diastolic, mean, and pulsepressure values changed significantly with changes in pump speed (p < 0.0001).When blood pressure values obtained from an arterial line were compared withthose from an automated cuff machine, the systolic, diastolic, and mean valuesdid not correlate (p < 0.05), but the calculated pulse pressures did (p = 0.33). A pulse pressure calculation of < 15 mm Hg resulted in aortic valve opening 24%of the time, and a pulse pressure > 15 mm Hg was predictive of aortic valveopening 65% of the time.CONCLUSIONS: Because aortic valve opening minimizes the risk of complications, a safe zone for most patients is a pulse pressure > 15 mm Hg. Arterial bloodpressure changes during axial-flow LVAD support can be predicted and may be used as a guide for the proper management of pump speed settings. A calculated pulsepressure from an arterial line or automated cuff may be used to determine a safe zone of Jarvik 2000 operation, leading to fewer complications.