: 21912269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]738. Circ Heart Fail. 2011 Nov;4(6):714-23. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.111.962472. Epub 2011 Sep 9.Patient-reported outcomes in left ventricular assist device therapy: a systematicreview and recommendations for clinical research and practice.Brouwers C(1), Denollet J, de Jonge N, Caliskan K, Kealy J, Pedersen SS.Author information: (1)Department of Medical Psychology and Neuropsychology, CoRPS, TilburgUniversity, Tilburg, The Netherlands.Comment in    Circ Heart Fail. 2011 Nov;4(6):680-1.BACKGROUND: Technological advancements of left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) have created today's potential for extending the lives of patients with end-stageheart failure. Few studies have examined the effect of LVAD therapy onpatient-reported outcomes (PROs), such as health status, quality of life, andanxiety/depression, despite poor PROs predicting mortality and rehospitalization in patients with heart failure. In this systematic review, we provide an overviewof available evidence on the impact of LVAD therapy on PROs and discussrecommendations for clinical research and practice.METHODS AND RESULTS: A systematic literature search identified 16 quantitativestudies with a sample size ≥10 (mean±SD age=50.1±12.6 years) that examined theimpact of LVAD therapy on PROs using a quantitative approach. Initial evidencesuggests an improvement in health status, anxiety, and depression in the firstfew months after LVAD implantation. However, PRO scores of patients receivingLVAD therapy are still lower for physical, social, and emotional functioningcompared with transplant recipients. These studies had several methodologicalshortcomings, including the use of relatively small sample sizes, and only apaucity of studies focused on anxiety and depression.CONCLUSIONS: There is a paucity of studies on the patient perspective of LVADtherapy. To advance the field of LVAD research and to optimize the care of anincreasingly growing population of patients receiving LVAD therapy, morewell-designed large-scale studies are needed to further elucidate the impact ofLVAD therapy on PROs.