: 22258830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]677. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2011;2011:4301-4. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091068.Haemodynamic modeling of the cardiovascular system using mock circulation loopsto test cardiovascular devices.Timms DL(1), Gregory SD, Stevens MC, Fraser JF.Author information: (1)BiVACOR Pty Ltd, and the ICET Laboratory, Critical Care Research Group, ThePrince Charles Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. daniel.timms@bivacor.com.auComprehensive testing and evaluation of cardiovascular device function andperformance is required prior to clinical implementation. Initial proof ofconcept investigations are conducted within in-vitro mock circulation loops,before proof of principle is demonstrated via in-vivo animal testing. Tofacilitate the rapid transition of cardiovascular devices through thisdevelopment period, a testing apparatus was developed that closely models thenatural human cardiovascular system haemodynamics. This mock circulation systemaccurately replicates cardiac function, coupled to systemic and pulmonarycirculations. The physiological response produced by a number of clinicalcardiovascular conditions can be actively controlled by variable parameters such as vascular resistance, arterial/venous compliance, ventricle contractility,heart rate, and heart /vascular volumes, while anatomical variations such asvalve regurgitation and septal defects can be included. Auto-regulation of these parameters was attempted to reproduce the Frank-Starling mechanism, baroreceptor reflex, skeletal muscle pump, and postural changes. Steady state validation ofloop performance was achieved by replicating the progression of a patient'sclinical haemodynamics from heart failure, through VAD support, to hearttransplantation. The system has been used to evaluate pulsatile and non-pulsatileventricular assist devices, counter pulsation devices, non-invasive cardiacoutput monitors and cardiovascular stents. The interaction of these devices with the cardiovascular system was also investigated with regards to physiologicalcontrol strategies and cannula placement. The system is a valuable tool for theaccelerated progression of cardiovascular device development.