: 20338336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]980. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010 Apr;89(4):1205-9; discussion 1210. doi:10.1016/j.athoracsur.2009.12.058.Left ventricular assist device destination therapy versus extended criteriacardiac transplant.Daneshmand MA(1), Rajagopal K, Lima B, Khorram N, Blue LJ, Lodge AJ, HernandezAF, Rogers JG, Milano CA.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.BACKGROUND: End-stage heart failure is a growing problem associated with a highmortality using conventional medical care. Although cardiac transplantation is anexcellent treatment option, it is a limited resource and most patients areineligible for cardiac transplantation using standard listing criteria.Increasingly, newer surgical options for these patients include the usage ofmarginal donor organs in an extended criteria-alternate list heart transplantprogram (EC-AL), or left ventricular assist devices as destination therapy(DT-LVAD). The purpose of this study was to compare baseline characteristics and outcomes after EC-AL versus DT-LVAD.METHODS: From March 2000 to August 2008, 153 consecutive patients who had beenturned down for standard heart transplantation underwent either EC-AL or DT-LVAD.The most common reasons for standard heart transplant ineligibility for bothgroups were advanced age, diabetes mellitus with end-organ dysfunction, andsignificant renal insufficiency. Patients in the alternate list program received a donor organ that had been turned down by all other centers for standard listrecipients. The most common reasons for donor heart refusal were decreased leftventricular function, left ventricle hypertrophy, or coronary artery disease.Outcomes for both groups were retrospectively reviewed after Institutional ReviewBoard permission was obtained. Comparisons were also made between patients thathad been matched by propensity score analysis.RESULTS: In all, 93 patients underwent EC-AL, and 60 underwent DT-LVAD. Baseline preoperative characteristics of both groups were similar except that 87% ofDT-LVAD patients (52 of 60) required preoperative mechanical or inotropic supportwhereas only 51% of EC-AL patients (47 of 93) required support (p<0.0001).Thirty-day operative mortality and 1-year survival were 2.5% and 82.2% for EC-AL and 6.7% and 77.5% DT-LVAD, respectively (p=0.2411 and p=0.5036). Overallsurvival at 3 years was better for EC-AL versus DT-LVAD. The DT-LVAD patients hadimproved survival compared with the Randomized Evaluation of MechanicalAssistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) trial DT-LVAD cohort, a historical control. These findings were corroborated in the analysis ofpropensity-matched patients.CONCLUSIONS: Preoperatively, the DT-LVAD cohort was more unstable, with greaterneed for inotropes or mechanical support. Despite this, perioperative and 1-year mortality was similar for the two groups. Three-year survival was better forEC-AL. The DT-LVAD patient survival was better than that of the REMATCH DT-LVADcohort.Copyright (c) 2010 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc.All rights reserved.