: 2597576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2130. ASAIO Trans. 1989 Jul-Sep;35(3):614-6.Extended clinical support with an implantable left ventricular assist device.McGee MG(1), Parnis SM, Nakatani T, Myers T, Dasse K, Hare WD, Duncan JM, PoirierVL, Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Cullen Cardiovascular Surgical Research Laboratories, Texas Heart Institute,Houston 77225.Clinical evaluations are under way of an intracorporeal (abdominally positioned) pulsatile left ventricular assist device (LVAD) that is capable of providingsupport for extended periods (greater than 30 days) in patients awaiting hearttransplantation. The LVAD, developed by Thermo Cardiosystems Inc. (Woburn, MA),has uniquely textured blood contacting surfaces and requires only minimalantithrombotic therapy. It has been used at the Texas Heart Institute as a bridgeto transplantation in 11 patients, including 2 who are currently receivingsupport. Four patients required extended LVAD support (35-132 days); of those,three are doing well at 1.5, 8.5, and 13 months, respectively, aftertransplantation, and one died of liver failure 49 days after transplantation. TheLVAD was operated in a fixed-rate mode to maintain pump flows at 4-8 L/min,resulting in stabilization of hemodynamic and secondary organ function in allpatients. Blood chemistry and hematologic values returned to normal during LVADsupport in three of four patients. Postoperative anticoagulation was graduallyreduced over the course of the trials. The two most recent patients (35 and 132days) received only oral dipyridamole (75 mg X 3/day) and aspirin (80 mg/day)after the early recovery period (four-six days), resulting in normal prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times. Plasma hemoglobin levels remained withinacceptable limits, and there was no evidence of thromboembolism. Blood contactingsurfaces were coated with a thin, adherent, biologically derived lining. Theinitial results indicate that the intracorporeal LVAD, with textured bloodcontacting surfaces, can effectively support the failing heart for extendedperiods (greater than 30 days) with minimal antithrombotic therapy.