: 12499890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1658. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002 Dec;22(6):965-70.Bridge to transplantation with the DeBakey VAD axial pump: a single centerreport.Grinda JM(1), Latremouille CH, Chevalier P, D'Attelis N, Boughenou F, Guillemain R, Deloche A, Fabiani JN.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, 20 rueLeblanc, 75015 Paris, France. jean-michel.grinda@egp.ap-hop-paris.frAIMS: To report our experience with a left ventricular assist device axial pumpas a bridge to transplantation: the DeBakey Ventricular Assist Device (VAD).METHODS: From February 1999 to February 2002, nine patients (among which eightmales), with a mean age of 47 years, all in NYHA functional class IV, wereproposed for a bridge to transplantation with the DeBakey VAD. Five patients had primary dilated cardiomyopathy, four had ischemic cardiomyopathy. All thepatients had inotropic support prior to the intervention (dobutamine with a mean dose of 12 mcg/kg per min), six had an intra-aortic counterpulsation, fourpresented ventricular rhythm disorders. Interventions were performed throughsternotomy alone (no need for an abdominal pocket) under extra-corporealcirculation on beating heart (except in one patient suffering from an apicalthrombosis for which cardioplegic arrest was performed) as followed: implantationof the apical inflow cannula, tunneling of the percutaneous cable, implantationof the outflow graft under aortic side clamping, starting of the DeBakey VADduring CPB weaning-off.RESULTS: Mean support duration was 81+/-62 days (16-224 days). Eight reoperationswere required (three for bleeding or cardiac tamponade, one for haemoperitoneum, one for aortic bifurcation thrombectomy, one for right ventricular assist device implantation, two for iterative replacements of the DeBakey VAD). A significanthemolysis was observed in two patients. No device infection or dysfunction wereobserved. Secondary recovery of a pulsed flow was observed either clinically orby Echo-Doppler in six patients. Five patients were transplanted, four died priorto transplantation (three from multi-organ failure on post-operative day 35, 16and 50, respectively, and the last patient was found disconnected at day 109).CONCLUSIONS: The DeBakey VAD is at the origin of renewed interest for continuous flow assist devices. Still under evaluation, the advantages of miniaturizationand facility of implantation of this new device seem to be promising.