: 22289902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]676. Heart Fail Rev. 2012 Sep;17(4-5):615-33. doi: 10.1007/s10741-012-9300-8.The paradox of left ventricular assist device unloading and myocardial recoveryin end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy: implications for heart failure in theelderly.Butler CR(1), Jugdutt BI.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Walter C. Mackenzie Health Sciences Center, Universityof Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. crbutler@ualberta.caDilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a common debilitating condition with limitedtherapeutic options besides heart transplantation or palliation. It ischaracterized by maladaptive remodeling of cardiomyocytes, extracellular collagenmatrix (ECCM) and left ventricular (LV) geometry which contributes to furtherdysfunction. LV assist devices (LVADs) can reverse adverse remodeling inend-stage DCM. However, there is a disconnect between the benefits of prolongedunloading with LVAD at molecular and cellular levels and the low rate of bridgeto recovery (BTR). Potential explanations for this paradox include insufficientreverse ECCM remodeling and/or excessive reverse cardiomyocyte remodeling withatrophy. LVAD therapy is associated with decreased collagen turnover andcross-linking and increased tissue angiotensin II (AngII), whereas LVAD combined with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition results in decreased tissue AngIIand collagen cross-linking, normalizes LV end-diastolic pressure volumerelationships and is associated with modestly higher rates of BTR. Much remainsto be learned about ventricular reverse remodeling after LVAD. This can befacilitated through systematic collection and comparison of recovered andunrecovered myocardium. Importantly, vigilant monitoring for ventricular recoveryamong LVAD patients is needed, particularly in older patients receiving LVAD for destination therapy. In addition, prospective multicenter trials are needed toclarify the potential benefit of concomitant heart failure therapy with selectiveβ2 agonism on ventricular recovery.