: 8010894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2033. Z Kardiol. 1994;83 Suppl 6:97-109.[Mechanical cardiac assist systems in intensive care].[Article in German]Figulla HR(1), Scholz KH.Author information: (1)Abteilung Kardiologie und Pulmonologie, Universitäts-Kliniken, Göttingen.The indications for the use of mechanical cardiac assist-devices are suddendeath, cardiogenic shock, severe coronary ischemia and high-risk PTCA. Among the cardiac assist-devices, currently available for cardiologists and cardiacsurgeons, are the Intraaortal Balloon Pump (IABP), the implantable turbine-pump, the percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS), centrifugal pumps which areconnected via a thoracotomy and intra- and extrathoracic total artificial hearts.It is easy to position the IABP, which can be continuously used over the courseof several days. In the case of cardiogenic shock, the pump should be implantedas soon as possible, in order to facilitate revascularisation procedure in apatient with ischemic heart disease. By this procedures the survival rate ofischemic cardiogenic shock has been raised from 20% to 60%. However, the IABPdoes not prove supportive in the case of an MI without shock or in high-riskPTCA. The implantable turbine pump (Hemopump TM) is available in 3configurations, ranging in external size from 14 F to 26 F. Of these, only the 14F pumps can be implanted percutaneously by a Seldinger technique, whereas thebigger pumps require arteriotomy or thoracotomy for placement. The pump-rates of these systems reach from 2.0 l/min to 4.5 l/min. These pumps are used inhigh-risk PTCA as well as CABG-surgery without cardiopulmonary support, but arestill currently in a test phase. However, at this point, it is still too early tofinally evaluate the clinical importance of these systems. The percutaneouscardiopulmonary support (PCPS) has a major advantage over all other assist devicesystems, as it completely replaces the circulation. Therefore, PCPS is especiallyindicated in cardiac arrest, because it can be inserted very quickly, evenwithout having to interrupt resuscitation. A second indication is high-risk PTCA,where it can be used also as a stand-by system. A study with 801 patients,investigating the use of this system in high-risk PTCA, resulted in a hospitalmortality of 6.9%. In therapy-resistant circulatory arrest, approximately 30% of patients could be saved with this system, provided that there is a very quickaccess to it, as there is for example in the cardiac cath lab. Centrifugal pumps,which are inserted via a thoracotomy, and artificial hearts have become veryimportant and are now used routinely in cardiac surgery to support patients, who have developed therapy-refractory heart failure, and in transplantation-surgeryas "bridging to transplant". These systems, however, bear the complications ofhemorrhage and thromboembolism.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)