: 17574516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1290. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2007 Jun;26(6):572-8. Epub 2007 May 2.Choroidal microcirculation in patients with rotary cardiac assist device.Polska E(1), Schima H, Wieselthaler G, Schmetterer L.Author information: (1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,Austria.BACKGROUND: In recent years, fully implanted rotary blood pumps have been usedfor long-term cardiac assist in patients with end-stage heart failure. With thesepumps, the pulsatility of arterial blood flow and arterial pressure pulse isconsiderably reduced. Effects on end-organ perfusion, particularlymicrocirculation, have been assessed.METHODS: The ocular choroid offers a unique opportunity to study the pulsatilecomponent of blood flow by measurement of fundus pulsation amplitude (FPA) aswell as the microcirculation by laser Doppler flowmetry. Both techniques wereapplied in three male patients with rotary pumps (MicroMed DeBakey VAD), in whom pump velocity was adjusted to four levels of flow between individual minimal needand maximal support. In addition, blood flow velocities in the ophthalmic artery (peak, end-diastolic and mean flow velocity--PSV, EDV and MFV, respectively) weremeasured using color Doppler imaging.RESULTS: Systolic blood pressure increased by 6 to 22 mm Hg with increasingsupport. At maximal support FPA was reduced by -60% to -52% as compared withminimal pump support. Blood flow in the choroidal microvasculature, however, did not show relevant changes. A reduction in PSV (-31%, range -47% to -21%) and apronounced rise in EDV (+93%, range +28% to +147%) was observed, whereas MFV was independent of pump flow.CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that mean choroidal blood flow is maintained when pump support is varied within therapeutic values, whereas the ratio of pulsatile to non-pulsatile choroidal flow changes. This study shows that, in patients with ventricular assist devices, a normal perfusion rate in the ocularmicrocirculation is maintained over a wide range of support conditions.