: 9301256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1915. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1997 Aug;16(8):822-31.The influence of infection on survival and successful transplantation in patientswith left ventricular assist devices.Argenziano M(1), Catanese KA, Moazami N, Gardocki MT, Weinberg AD, Clavenna MW,Rose EA, Scully BE, Levin HR, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia College of Physicians andSurgeons, New York, N.Y., USA.BACKGROUND: Mechanical cardiac assistance has recently emerged as a tenableoption in the treatment of end-stage heart failure. In spite of recent technical improvements that have reduced the incidence of life-threatening complications,the reported frequency of infections in these patients has remained high.METHODS: Over a 5-year period, 60 patients underwent insertion of a leftventricular assist device (LVAD) at our institution. Detailed medical recordswere kept prospectively for all patients, and a variety of endpoints wereanalyzed, including the incidence, nature, and sequelae of infections before and after LVAD implantation and after transplantation.RESULTS: Twenty-nine of 60 patients (48%) undergoing LVAD insertion subsequently had development of infections. The most frequent sites of infection were blood,LVAD drivelines, and central venous catheters, representing 61% of allinfections. At the time of LVAD implantation, 13 of 60 patients (22%) hadculture-proven infections. In spite of an increased incidence of subsequentinfection (77% vs 40%), there were no differences in rates of mortality (31% vs26%), LVAD endocarditis, (23% vs 11%) and eventual transplantation (62% vs 57%)between these patients and those without periimplantation infections. Althoughthe overall mortality rate was not influenced by infections during LVAD support(28% vs 26%), the development of LVAD endocarditis was associated with a highmortality rate. Finally, although patients with infections during LVAD supporthad significantly longer median support times than those who remained infectionfree (101 vs 49 days, respectively), there was no difference in the rate ofsuccessful transplantation (59% vs 58%) or in the rate of infection aftertransplantation (35% vs 28%).CONCLUSIONS: Infections are common in patients undergoing LVAD support, but they do not adversely affect survival, the rate of successful transplantation, or the incidence of posttransplantation infection. Periimplantation infections mayincrease the risk of subsequent infections, but they also do not influencesurvival or transplantability. Patients with development of LVAD endocarditis areat increased risk for morbidity and death and require early and aggressivetherapy, potentially including device explantation.