: 21531579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]802. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011 Aug;30(8):896-903. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2011.03.009. Epub 2011 May 6.Evaluation of right ventricular function and post-operative findings usingcardiac computed tomography in patients with left ventricular assist devices.Garcia-Alvarez A(1), Fernandez-Friera L, Lau JF, Sawit ST, Mirelis JG, CastilloJG, Pinney S, Anyanwu AC, Fuster V, Sanz J, Garcia MJ.Author information: (1)Zena and Michael A Wiener Cardiovascular Institute and Marie-Josee and Henry RKravis Center for Cardiovascular Health, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York,New York, USA.BACKGROUND: Right ventricular (RV) failure is a major contributor to morbidityand mortality after left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation. Accurate evaluation of RV function in patients with LVAD remains challenging. Wehypothesized that, after LVAD implantation, electrocardiographic-gated cardiaccomputed tomography (CCT) allows RV evaluation with higher feasibility andreproducibility compared with echocardiography.METHODS: Thirty-six patients with an implanted LVAD who had 2-dimensionalechocardiography and CCT evaluation were studied. RV end-diastolic andend-systolic volumes and ejection fraction were quantified using CCT. RVfractional area change, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion and RVend-diastolic short-to-long axis ratio were calculated by echocardiography.Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) and Bland-Altman analysis were used toassess intra- and interobserver reproducibility for all measurements.RESULTS: The quality of CCT studies was good in all cases except for one. Intra- and interobserver reproducibility for all CCT measurements was high(interobserver ICC for RV ejection fraction = 0.89, 95% confidence interval 0.74 to 0.95). Echocardiographic indices of RV function and geometry had lowerreproducibility. The echocardiographic index that best correlated with theCCT-determined RV ejection fraction was RV fractional area change (r = 0.80, p < 0.001). In addition, CCT detected relevant post-operative findings in 50% of the patients.CONCLUSIONS: CCT is highly effective and reproducible compared withechocardiography for the evaluation of RV function in patients with LVAD support and provides relevant information on post-operative findings. Our results suggestthat CCT should be considered as a useful imaging modality in this clinicalsetting.Copyright © 2011 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.