: 25491007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]69. Prog Transplant. 2014 Dec;24(4):332-40. doi: 10.7182/pit2014684.Family caregivers' inside perspectives: caring for an adult with a leftventricular assist device as a destination therapy.Marcuccilli L(1), Casida JJ(2), Bakas T(1), Pagani FD(2).Author information: (1)Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana. (2)The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.CONTEXT: Understanding the experience of caring for an adult with aleft-ventricular assist device as a destination therapy (LVAD-DT) remains in its infancy.OBJECTIVE/DESIGN: A hermeneutic-phenomenological inquiry guided by van Manen'smethods was used to explore the LVAD-DT family caregivingexperience.Participants/Setting-Seven family caregivers (1 man and 6 women) 50 to74 years old who cared for an adult with an LVAD-DT in home settings. Recruitmentand data collection occurred in an outpatient mechanical circulatory supportcenter in the Midwest.METHODS: Data were collected by means of face-to-face interviews using open-endedquestions and 1 follow-up interview. Interviews were audio recorded andtranscribed verbatim. Thematic analysis consisted of writing, rewriting, andreflecting across participants' data, which produced themes illustrating theexperience and meaning of caring for an adult with an LVAD-DT. Themes wereconsensually validated. Procedures for trustworthiness are described.RESULTS: Five main themes were identified from participants' experiences: (1)advanced heart failure is a life-changing event, (2) self-doubt about LVADcaregiving improves over time, (3) lifestyle adjustments come with time, (4)persistent worry and stress, and (5) caregiving is not a burden-it's a part oflife. These main themes were elucidated by 8 subthemes in which participantsdescribed a process of adjustment despite persistent worry and stress andeventually accepted caregiving as part of their lives. Future studies are needed to explore caregiver burden, adaptation, and the effects of caregiving outcomes, such as emotional and physical health and overall quality of life.