: 23180532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]536. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012 Dec;94(6):2147-58. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.09.040.Epub 2012 Nov 12.Statement regarding the pre and post market assessment of durable, implantableventricular assist devices in the United States.Acker MA(1), Pagani FD, Stough WG, Mann DL, Jessup M, Kormos R, Slaughter MS,Baldwin T, Stevenson L, Aaronson KD, Miller L, Naftel D, Yancy C, Rogers J,Teuteberg J, Starling RC, Griffith B, Boyce S, Westaby S, Blume E, Wearden P,Higgins R, Mack M.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Hospital ofthe University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.michael.acker@uphs.upenn.eduThe incorporation of complex medical device technologies into clinical practiceis governed by critical oversight of the US Food and Drug Administration. Thisregulatory process requires a judicious balance between assuring safety andefficacy, while providing efficient review to facilitate access to innovativetherapies. Recent contrasting views of the regulatory process have emphasized thedifficulties in obtaining an optimal balance. Mechanical circulatory support has evolved to become an important therapy for patients who have advanced heartfailure with the advent of more durable, implantable ventricular assist devices. The regulatory oversight of these new technologies has been difficult owing tothe complexities of these devices, associated adverse event profile, and severityof illness of the intended patient population. Maintaining a regulatoryenvironment to foster efficient introduction of safe and effective technologiesis critical to the success of ventricular assist device therapy and the health ofpatients with advanced heart failure. Physicians representing key surgical andcardiology societies, and representatives from the Food and Drug Administration, National Heart Lung, and Blood Institute, Centers for Medicare and MedicaidServices, Interagency Registry of Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support, and industry partners gathered to discuss relevant issues regarding the currentregulatory environment assessing ventricular assist devices. The goal of themeeting was to explore innovative ways to foster the introduction oftechnologically advanced, safe, and effective ventricular assist devices. Thefollowing summary reflects opinions and conclusions endorsed by The Society ofThoracic Surgeons, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American HeartAssociation, Heart Failure Society of America, International Society for Heartand Lung Transplantation, and Interagency Registry of Mechanically AssistedCirculatory Support.Copyright © 2012 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, American Heart Association,Inc, and International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. Published byElsevier Inc. All rights reserved.