: 22484784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]649. Eur J Heart Fail. 2012 Jun;14(6):571-80. doi: 10.1093/eurjhf/hfs038. Epub 2012Apr 1.Mechanical unloading reverses transverse tubule remodelling and normalizes local Ca(2+)-induced Ca(2+)release in a rodent model of heart failure.Ibrahim M(1), Navaratnarajah M, Siedlecka U, Rao C, Dias P, Moshkov AV, GorelikJ, Yacoub MH, Terracciano CM.Author information: (1)Laboratory of Cell Electrophysiology, Harefield Heart Science Centre, ImperialCollege London, London, UK.AIMS: Ca(2+)-induced Ca(2+) release (CICR) is critical for contraction incardiomyocytes. The transverse (t)-tubule system guarantees the proximity of the triggers for Ca(2+) release [L-type Ca(2+) channel, dihydropyridine receptors(DHPRs)] and the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) release channels [ryanodinereceptors (RyRs)]. Transverse tubule disruption occurs early in heart failure(HF). Clinical studies of left ventricular assist devices in HF indicate thatmechanical unloading induces reverse remodelling. We hypothesize that unloadingof failing hearts normalizes t-tubule structure and improves CICR.METHODS AND RESULTS: Heart failure was induced in Lewis rats by left coronaryartery ligation for 12 weeks; sham-operated animals were used as controls.Failing hearts were mechanically unloaded for 4 weeks by heterotopic abdominalheart transplantation (HF-UN). HF reduced the t-tubule density measured bydi-8-ANEPPS staining in isolated left ventricular myocytes, and this was reversedby unloading. The deterioration in the regularity of the t-tubule system in HFwas also reversed in HF-UN. Scanning ion conductance microscopy showed thereappearance of normal surface striations in HF-UN. Electron microscopy revealed recovery of normal t-tubule microarchitecture in HF-UN. L-type Ca(2+) currentdensity, measured using whole-cell patch clamping, was reduced in HF butunaffected by unloading. The variance of the time-to-peak of the Ca(2+)transient, an index of CICR dyssynchrony, was increased in HF and normalized byunloading. The increased Ca(2+) spark frequency observed in HF was reduced inHF-UN. These results could be explained by the recoupling of orphaned RyRs in HF,as indicated by immunofluorescence.CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that mechanical unloading of the failing heartreverses the pathological remodelling of the t-tubule system and improves CICR.PMCID: PMC3359860