: 25577566  [PubMed - in process]52. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015 Apr;34(4):489-96. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2014.11.001. Epub 2014 Nov 8.Exercise in heart failure patients supported with a left ventricular assistdevice.Jung MH(1), Gustafsson F(2).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiology, The Heart Center, University HospitalRigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:metteholmejung@dadlnet.dk. (2)Department of Cardiology, The Heart Center,University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.After implantation of a continuous-flow left ventricular assist device (CF-LVAD),exercise capacity in heart failure patients remains reduced with peak oxygenuptake (peak VO2) values averaging from 11 to 20 ml/kg/min. Total cardiac output in CF-LVAD patients during exercise is predominantly determined by pump speed,the pressure difference across the pump, and in some cases ejection through theaortic valve. Fixed pump speed utilized in CF-LVADs may provide insufficientsupport, resulting in a moderate cardiac output increase during increasedphysical strain. Ongoing studies are evaluating whether pump speed changes inresponse to varied loading conditions may enable LVADs to provide sufficientsupport even during strenuous exercise. In the currently used devices, evidencesuggests that focus on optimizing non-cardiac peripheral parameters is vital.Extra-cardiac potentially reversible factors are anemia with low oxygen-carrying capacity, obesity and general deconditioning with low muscle mass. In addition,exercise training in CF-LVAD patients can improve peak VO2. To designinterventions to improve functional capacity in patients treated with moderndurable LVADs, a detailed understanding of exercise physiology in acontinuous-flow circulatory system is necessary. In this review we address thedifferent components of exercise physiology in LVAD patients and point outpotential solutions or areas of future research.Copyright © 2015 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.