: 25613996  [PubMed - in process]49. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015 Jan 20. pii: ezu544. [Epub ahead of print]Outcome of mechanical cardiac support in children using more than one modality asa bridge to heart transplantation†De Rita F(1), Hasan A(2), Haynes S(3), Peng E(2), Gandolfo F(2), Ferguson L(3),Kirk R(4), Smith J(3), Griselli M(2).Author information: (1)Department of Paediatric Cardiac Surgery, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle UponTyne, UK fabrizio.derita@gmail.com. (2)Department of Paediatric Cardiac Surgery, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK. (3)Department of Paediatric Intensive Care, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK. (4)Department of PaediatricCardiology, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.OBJECTIVES: Mechanical cardiac support (MCS) can successfully be applied as abridging strategy for heart transplantation (OHTx) in children withlife-threatening heart failure. Emergent use of MCS is often required beforeestablishing the likelihood of OHTx. This can require bridge-to-bridge strategiesto increase survival on the waiting list. We compared the outcome of childrenwith heart failure who underwent single MCS with those who required multiple MCS as a bridge to OHTx.METHODS: A retrospective study of patients aged less than 16 years was conducted.From March 1998 to October 2005, we used either a veno-arterial extracorporealmembrane oxygenator (VA-ECMO), or the Medos® para-corporeal ventricular assistdevice (VAD). From November 2005 onwards, the Berlin Heart EXCOR® (BHE) devicewas implanted in the majority of cases. Several combinations of bridge-to-bridge strategies have been used: VA-ECMO and then conversion to BHE; BHE and thenconversion to VA-ECMO; left VAD and then upgraded to biventricular support(BIVAD); conversion from pulsatile to continuous-flow pumps.RESULTS: A total of 92 patients received MCS with the intent to bridge to OHTx,including 21 (23%) supported with more than one modality. The mean age and weightat support was similar in both groups, but multimodality MCS was used more often in infancy (P = 0.008) and in children less than 10 kg in weight (P = 0.02). The mean duration of support was longer in the multiple MCS group: 40 ± 48 vs 84 ± 43days (P = 0.0003). Usage of multimodality MCS in dilated cardiomyopathy (19%) andin other diagnoses (29%) was comparable. Incidence of major morbidity(haematological sequelae, cerebrovascular events and sepsis) was similar in both groups. Survival to OHTx/explantation of the device (recovery) and survival todischarge did not differ between single MCS and multiple MCS groups (78 vs 81%and 72 vs 76%, respectively).CONCLUSION: Bridge to OHTx with multiple MCS does not seem to influence theoutcome in our population. Infancy and body weight less than 10 kg do not tend toproduce higher mortality in the multiple MCS group. However, children receivingmore than one modality are supported for longer durations.© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.