: 24342898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]305. Sci Transl Med. 2013 Dec 11;5(215):215re3. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007328.Metabolic rates of ATP transfer through creatine kinase (CK Flux) predictclinical heart failure events and death.Bottomley PA(1), Panjrath GS, Lai S, Hirsch GA, Wu K, Najjar SS, Steinberg A,Gerstenblith G, Weiss RG.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins UniversitySchool of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.Comment in    Circ Res. 2014 Apr 11;114(8):1228-30.Morbidity and mortality from heart failure (HF) are high, and current riskstratification approaches for predicting HF progression are imperfect. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is required for normal cardiac contraction, and abnormalities in creatine kinase (CK) energy metabolism, the primary myocardial energy reserve reaction, have been observed in experimental and clinical HF. However, theprognostic value of abnormalities in ATP production rates through CK in human HF has not been investigated. Fifty-eight HF patients with nonischemiccardiomyopathy underwent Â³Â¹P magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) to quantifycardiac high-energy phosphates and the rate of ATP synthesis through CK (CK flux)and were prospectively followed for a median of 4.7 years. Multiple-eventanalysis (MEA) was performed for HF-related events including all-cause andcardiac death, HF hospitalization, cardiac transplantation, andventricular-assist device placement. Among baseline demographic, clinical, andmetabolic parameters, MEA identified four independent predictors of HF events:New York Heart Association (NYHA) class, left ventricular ejection fraction(LVEF), African-American race, and CK flux. Reduced myocardial CK flux was asignificant predictor of HF outcomes, even after correction for NYHA class, LVEF,and race. For each increase in CK flux of 1 Î¼mol gâ?»Â¹ sâ?»Â¹, risk of HF-relatedcomposite outcomes decreased by 32 to 39%. These findings suggest that reduced CKflux may be a potential HF treatment target. Newer imaging strategies, including noninvasive Â³Â¹P MRS that detect altered ATP kinetics, could thus complement risk stratification in HF and add value in conditions involving other tissues withhigh energy demands, including skeletal muscle and brain.