: 23799758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]409. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2013 Oct;17(4):616-24. doi:10.1093/icvts/ivt263. Epub 2013 Jun 24.Analysis of aortic valve commissural fusion after support with continuous-flowleft ventricular assist device.Martina JR(1), Schipper ME, de Jonge N, Ramjankhan F, de Weger RA, Lahpor JR,Vink A.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Utrecht,Utrecht, Netherlands.OBJECTIVES: Continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices (cf-LVADs) may inducecommissural fusion of the aortic valve leaflets. Factors associated with thisoccurrence of commissural fusion are unknown. The aim of this study was toexamine histological characteristics of cf-LVAD-induced commissural fusion inrelation to clinical variables.METHODS: Gross and histopathological examinations were performed on 19 heartsfrom patients supported by either HeartMate II (n = 17) or HeartWare (n = 2)cf-LVADs and related to clinical characteristics (14 heart transplantation, 5autopsy).RESULTS: Eleven of the 19 (58%) aortic valves showed fusion of single or multiplecommissures (total fusion length 11 mm [4-20] (median [interquartile range]) per valve), some leading to noticeable nodular displacements or considerable lumendiameter narrowing. Multiple fenestrations were observed in one valve.Histopathological examination confirmed commissural fusion, with varying changes in valve layer structure without evidence of inflammatory infiltration at thesite of fusion. Commissural fusion was associated with continuous aortic valveclosure during cf-LVAD support (P = 0.03). LVAD-induced aortic valveinsufficiency developed in all patients with commissural fusion and in 67% ofpatients without fusion. Age, duration of cf-LVAD support and aetiology of heart failure (ischaemic vs dilated cardiomyopathy) were not associated with the degreeof fusion.CONCLUSIONS: Aortic valve commissural fusion after support with cf-LVADs is anon-inflammatory process leading to changes in valve layer structure that can be observed in >50% of cf-LVAD patients. This is the first study showing thatpatients receiving full cf-LVAD support without opening of the valve have asignificantly higher risk of developing commissural fusion than patients onpartial support.PMCID: PMC3781792