: 12918574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1606. Cardiovasc Res. 2003 Aug 1;59(2):390-9.Dynamic regulation of MEK/Erks and Akt/GSK-3beta in human end-stage heart failureafter left ventricular mechanical support: myocardialmechanotransduction-sensitivity as a possible molecular mechanism.Baba HA(1), Stypmann J, Grabellus F, Kirchhof P, Sokoll A, Schäfers M, Takeda A, Wilhelm MJ, Scheld HH, Takeda N, Breithardt G, Levkau B.Author information: (1)Institute of Pathology, University of Essen, Essen, Germany.Comment in    Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Jan 1;61(1):196-7; author reply 198-9.OBJECTIVE: Left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) are used to 'bridge' patientswith end-stage heart failure to transplantation. After long-term LVAD support,ventricular function may partially recover, a process called 'reverseremodeling'. As several kinase-mediated signal transduction pathways have beenimplicated in the development of cardiac hypertrophy and failure, we examined theactivities of the Erks, MEKs, Akt, GSK-3 beta, p70S6K, JNKs and p38 under LVADsupport as well as during single myocyte strain and whole heart stretch.METHODS: Western blotting and immunohistochemistry were performed usingphospho-specific antibodies in matched samples from ten patients with end-stageheart failure before and after LVAD. Cyclic strain was performed in rat neonatal cardiac myocytes, and tensile stretch applied to Langendorff-perfused mousehearts via a left ventricular balloon.RESULTS: The activity of Erks and Akt in failing hearts dramatically decreasedafter LVAD support, while that of GSK-3 beta increased. There was anendo/epicardial gradient for Erk activity which persisted after LVAD despite the reduction of total Erk activity. TUNEL-positivity and myocyte size decreasedafter LVAD, but independently of changes in kinase activity. In cardiomyocytesand Langendorff-perfused mouse hearts both strain/stretch and its reliefregulated the activities of Erks, Akt, and GSK-3 beta.CONCLUSION: Erks and Akt/GSK-3 beta are highly responsive to myocyte stretch invitro and in vivo, and may be sensitive molecular parameters of 'reverseremodeling' under LVAD support.