: 12633700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1647. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2003 Mar;22(3):292-300.Left ventricular function during support with an asynchronous pulsatile leftventricular assist device.Dalby MC(1), Banner NR, Tansley P, Grieve LA, Partridge J, Yacoub MH.Author information: (1)Harefield Hospital, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, London, UKBACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are frequently used tomaintain patients with severe heart failure until heart transplantation becomespossible. Some patients may experience recovery of LV function during suchsupport. Therefore, it is essential to be able to monitor changes in LV function in this setting.METHODS: We studied LV function in 10 patients (median age 34 years, 9 male) who had LVADs implanted because of severe heart failure due to dilated cardiomyopathya median of 4 months previously. Median pre-implant ejection fraction was 27% andall patients had been on maximal medical therapy, including intravenous inotropicsupport, prior to insertion of the LVAD.RESULTS: During LVAD support there were cyclical variations in LV dimensions,fractional shortening (FS) and transmitral flow, related to changes in the phase relationship of the LV and the LVAD. The "best" FS occurred when LV systolecoincided with device filling and the "worst" FS when LV systole coincided withdevice ejection. Median FS with the pump switched off was 18% (10% to 32%).Pump-off FS was significantly greater than the "worst" FS with the pump on (5%, p= 0.002), and similar to the "best" pump-on FS (19%, p = NS).CONCLUSIONS: LV function could be studied echocardiographically during LV supportand brief periods of interruption in support. Function varied according to thephase relationship of the LV and LVAD. The "best" FS measured during LVAD supportwas more closely related to the FS with the device switched off than the "worst" pump on FS. The "best" pump-on LV function is therefore most representative ofintrinsic LV performance and can be used as a guide to recovery and the potentialneed for pump-off studies.