: 7948290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2019. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1994 Jul-Aug;13(4):641-50; discussion 651.Physiology of the native heart and Thermo Cardiosystems left ventricular assistdevice complex at rest and during exercise: implications for chronic support.Branch KR(1), Dembitsky WP, Peterson KL, Adamson R, Gordon JB, Smith SC Jr, JaskiBE.Author information: (1)San Diego Cardiac Center, CA 92123.Studies of patients supported with a left ventricular assist device haveconsidered determinants of acute survival emphasizing the role of right heartfunction. In patients with refractory heart failure awaiting hearttransplantation, chronic left ventricular assist device implantation may provide an opportunity for rehabilitation before surgery if hemodynamics are adequate at rest and during activities of daily life. For the assessment of the efficacy ofthe left ventricular assist device in this setting, four patients in whom theHeartMate pneumatic left ventricular assist device had been implanted were testedduring graded supine bicycle exercise with Doppler echocardiography interrogationand central hemodynamic measurements. Patients with left ventricular assistdevice increased total left ventricular-left ventricular assist device complexoutput with exercise as Fick cardiac output increased from 5.7 +/- 1.5 to 8.6 +/-3.1 L/min (mean +/- standard deviation). In two patients, peak left ventricularassist device rate and output were either present at the start of exercise orreached at mid-exercise and were associated with abrupt increases in leftventricular filling pressures (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure = 9 to 27 mm Hgand 12 to 24 mm Hg, respectively). During exercise, left ventricularend-diastolic size and pressure increased as right ventricular dimensionsdecreased or remained the same (patients 1, 3, and 4: 1.7 to 1.8 cm, 4.7 to 3.9cm, and 2.6 to 1.8 cm, respectively) despite increased right atrial fillingpressures, implying a decrease in functional right ventricular diastoliccompliance. Although the left ventricular assist device functioned as a seriespump at rest, Fick cardiac output exceeded left ventricular assist device output during exercise consistent with parallel ejection of the left ventricle throughthe native aortic valve. During exercise, residual left ventricular function may contribute to the hemodynamic response by (1) active filling of the leftventricular assist device to reduce filling time and to overcome left ventricularassist device inflow cannula impedance, (2) augmentation of total cardiac output with parallel ejection out of the native aortic valve, or (3) reduction ofventricular interaction-related changes in functional right ventricular diastoliccompliance. When residual left ventricular function is sufficient, hemodynamicswith exercise may be limited by peak left ventricular assist device rate.Although right ventricular function may affect acute postoperative survival,residual left ventricular function and peak left ventricular assist device ratemay be important determinants of exercise performance during chronicimplantation. A preliminary model of factors affecting the "left ventricular-leftventricular assist device complex" performance at rest and during exercise ispresented.