: 22523158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]643. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2012 Oct;144(4):951-5. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2012.03.007. Epub 2012 Apr 20.Intra-aortic balloon pump inserted through the subclavian artery: A minimallyinvasive approach to mechanical support in the ambulatory end-stage heart failurepatient.Russo MJ(1), Jeevanandam V, Stepney J, Merlo A, Johnson EM, Malyala R, Raman J.Author information: (1)Center for Aortic Diseases, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.mrusso@uchicago.eduOBJECTIVE: Intra-aortic balloon pumps are traditionally inserted through thefemoral artery, limiting the patient's mobility. We used alternate approaches of intra-aortic balloon pump insertion to provide temporary and minimally invasivesupport for patients with decompensating, end-stage heart failure. The presentstudy describes the outcomes with closed-chest, transthoracic intra-aorticballoon pumps by way of the subclavian artery.METHODS: During a 3-year period, 20 patients underwent subclavianartery-intra-aortic balloon pump in the setting of end-stage heart failure. Theballoon was inserted through a polytetrafluoroethylene graft sutured to the rightsubclavian artery in 19 patients (95%) and to the left subclavian artery in 1patient (5%). The goal of support was to bridge to transplantation in 17 patients(85%) and bridge to recovery in 3 patients (15%). The primary outcome measure wasdeath during subclavian artery-intra-aortic balloon pump support. The secondaryoutcomes included survival to the intended endpoint of bridge totransplantation/bridge to recovery, complications during subclavianartery-intra-aortic balloon pump support (eg, stroke, limb ischemia, brachialplexus injury, dissection, bleeding requiring reoperation, and device-relatedinfection), emergent surgery for worsening heart failure, and ambulation duringintra-aortic balloon pump support.RESULTS: The duration of balloon support ranged from 3 to 48 days (mean, 17.3 ±13.1 days). No patients died during subclavian artery-intra-aortic balloon pumpsupport. Of the 20 patients, 14 (70%) were successfully bridged to transplant or left ventricular-assist device. Two patients (10%) required emergent leftventricular-assist device for worsening heart failure.CONCLUSIONS: An intra-aortic balloon pump inserted through the subclavian artery is a simple, minimally invasive approach to mechanical support and is associated with limited morbidity and facilitates ambulation in patients with end-stageheart failure.Copyright © 2012 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published byMosby, Inc. All rights reserved.