: 15718504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1488. Int J Cardiol. 2005 Feb 28;98(3):465-70.Similar left and right ventricular sarcomere structure after support with a left ventricular assist device suggests the utility of right ventricular biopsies tomonitor left ventricular reverse remodeling.de Jonge N(1), Lahpor JR, van Wichen DF, Kirkels H, Gmelig-Meyling FH, van denTweel JG, Doevendans PA, de Weger RA.Author information: (1)Heart Lung Center Utrecht, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,Netherlands. n.dejonge@azu.nlBACKGROUND: To evaluate whether the morphology of the contractile filaments incardiomyocytes of patients with end-stage heart failure, treated with a leftventricular assist device (LVAD), is identical in the left- and right ventricle(LV, RV) and in the interventricular septum (IVS) and can be monitored bybiopsies taken with a bioptome. The application of an LVAD as a bridge torecovery of cardiac function requires monitoring of myocyte recovery. The use of RV biopsies for this purpose might be feasible, if morphologic findings in the RVcoincide with those in the LV.METHODS AND RESULTS: At the time of heart transplantation, myocardial biopsies ofLV, RV and IVS from 13 patients after LVAD support were compared usingimmunohistochemistry with monoclonal antibodies against contractile proteins.Additionally, in five of these patients, small biopsies obtained with adiagnostic bioptome were compared with large transmural biopsies of the sameregion. Hemodynamic monitoring was performed when the patients were fullyrecovered from the implantation, to rule out persistent RV failure. The staining pattern of actin, myosin, tropomyosin, troponin T and C was identical in thebiopsies of LV, RV and IVS. Small biopsies taken with a bioptome appeared to berepresentative for the larger biopsies. Hemodynamic monitoring showed absence of RV failure in our study group.CONCLUSION: In the absence of RV failure, morphology of the contractilemyofilaments after LVAD support for 215+/-143 days is identical in LV, RV andIVS. This may allow monitoring of the possible occurrence of LV reverseremodeling by RV biopsies.