: 12146142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1676. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2002 Aug;22(2):228-32.The Jarvik 2000 Heart. Clinical validation of the intraventricular position.Westaby S(1), Frazier OH, Beyersdorf F, Saito S, Siegenthaler MP, Pigott DW,Catarino PA, Jarvik R.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Oxford Heart Centre, The John RadcliffeHospital, Headleyway, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. swestaby@ahf.org.ukOBJECTIVE: Heart failure is now a public health epidemic. Donor hearts areseverely restricted in availability. Permanent mechanical circulatory support or bridge to myocardial recovery are emerging alternatives. After extensivelaboratory experience we sought to evaluate the intraventricular Jarvik 2000Heart in patients with endstage heart failure.METHODS: The Jarvik 2000 Heart is a novel thumb-sized left ventricular assistdevice (LVAD) which is fitted within the apex of the native left ventricle. Avascular graft off loads this to the descending thoracic aorta. The pump rotorspins at between 8000 and 12,000 rpm providing 5-6 litres blood flow per minute. We have used the device with skull-mounted power delivery for seven permanentimplants and trans-abdominal drive line for ten bridge-to-transplant patients.RESULTS: All patients survived the operation. Three died from non-device related complications. Survivors had early resolution of heart failure with return toNYHA I/II. All had pulsatile circulation. The device was user-friendly andimperceptible to the patient. Both the pump and native left ventricle contributedto the cardiac output during exercise. Seven patients have been transplantedsuccessfully. All explanted devices were free from thrombus formation. Twopermanent implant patients left hospital as early as 3 weeks postoperatively.CONCLUSIONS: The Jarvik 2000 is an effective user-friendly LVAD which allowsearly discharge from hospital. The intraventricular position has distinctadvantages especially through absence of an inflow cannula. Synergy developsbetween the LVAD and native left ventricle. Early experience suggests that thismay be a realistic LVAD to treat heart failure routinely in the outpatientsetting.