: 24418734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]274. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Jan;33(1):44-50. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.08.019.Epub 2013 Nov 14.Hemolysis in left ventricular assist device: a retrospective analysis ofoutcomes.Ravichandran AK(1), Parker J(2), Novak E(2), Joseph SM(2), Schilling JD(2), EwaldGA(2), Silvestry S(3).Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,Missouri. Electronic address: aravicha@dom.wustl.edu. (2)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri. (3)Department ofSurgery, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri.BACKGROUND: Hemolysis is becoming increasingly recognized as a major complicationof left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support. Data regarding risk factors,prevalence, and outcomes are limited. To better define the characteristics andprognosis of hemolysis, we present a retrospective case-control study of LVADpatients in our institution.METHODS: A detailed record review was conducted of 18 patients supported with theHeartMate II (HMII; Thoratec Corp, Pleasanton, CA) who were diagnosed withhemolysis, and their data were compared with 82 patients who received an LVADimplant during the same period who did not develop hemolysis. Patients wereexcluded if they did not survive hospitalization at the time of LVADimplantation. The primary end points of this analysis were time to death and timeto first hospitalization.RESULTS: Of 100 total patients, 18 HMII patients (18%) were diagnosed withhemolysis. Those with hemolysis were younger, had significantly higher lactatedehydrogenase and bilirubin levels, lower international normalized ratio, and no difference in cannula velocities by transthoracic echocardiography. Patientsurvival in the hemolysis group was markedly decreased at 1 year (38.9% vs 89.3%,p < 0.001), but no differences in hospitalization (p = 0.57) were observed.Partial to complete thrombosis was noted in all of the pumps at explant.CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that hemolysis is associated with highmortality, likely serving as a marker of pump thrombosis. Elevated lactatedehydrogenase and bilirubin levels are important indicators for hemolysis, andlower international normalized ratio may pre-dispose for this worrisomecondition. Diagnosis should prompt clinicians to consider pump exchange orexplant, listing for transplantation, or intensifying anti-coagulation.Copyright © 2014 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.