: 9273958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1920. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1997 Jun;11(6):1045-51.Improvement of heart-, lung-, and liver-performance during mechanical circulatorysupport by the Novacor-system.Roell W(1), Goedje O, Vetter HO, Schmitz C, Dewald O, Reichart B.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, GrosshadernMedical Center, Munich, Germany.OBJECTIVE: Since its clinical introduction, the Novacor left ventricular assistsystem (LVAS) has proved to be a reliable and safe method for bridging to cardiactransplantation. To find out whether univentricular assistance is sufficient inpatients with severe global heart failure, multi organ monitoring using the COLD system was performed.METHODS: In seven patients (mean age 38.8 years), the wearable Novacor systemN100 was implanted. Preoperatively, during the first 72 h thereafter and beforeheart transplantation right and left ventricular cardiac output, rightventricular ejection fraction, pulmonary-, intrathoracic-and total blood volume, extravascular lung water and excretory liver function were monitored by means of double indicator dilution technique with the COLD system. Conventionalhemodynamic parameters have also been documented.RESULTS: During left ventricular assistance, both pulmonary and systemic arterialcardiac outputs increased significantly (Student's t-test, P < 0.05). Rightventricular ejection fraction rose from 17 to 26%, preoperatively elevatedpulmonary and intrathoracic blood volumes and extravascular lung water fellsignificantly to normal ranges. Total blood volume remained constant, excretoryliver function improved markedly.CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary cardiac output improves due to the reduced rightventricular afterload by unloading the impaired left ventricle with the Novacorpump. The drop in pulmonary blood volume, intrathoracic blood volume andextravascular lung water also indicates a decrease of pulmonary congestion. Sincetotal blood volume remains unchanged, a volume shift to the systemic circulation is suggested, resulting in an improved splanchnic perfusion as demonstrated by a better excretory liver function. In the absence of primary pulmonaryhypertension, treatment of global heart failure with a left ventricular assistdevice is possible. The COLD system is a useful tool for managing this patientgroup during the postoperative period.