: 19847084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1029. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Jan;29(1):125-32. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2009.07.022. Epub 2009 Oct 17.Ventricular unloading is associated with increased 20s proteasome proteinexpression in the myocardium.Wohlschlaeger J(1), Sixt SU, Stoeppler T, Schmitz KJ, Levkau B, Tsagakis K,Vahlhaus C, Schmid C, Peters J, Schmid KW, Milting H, Baba HA.Author information: (1)Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, University Hospital of Essen,University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.BACKGROUND: The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) breaks down misfolded andnormal proteins, including cell cycle regulatory proteins involved in cardiachypertrophy. Because congestive heart failure (CHF) increases cardiomyocytecellular mass, indicative of increased protein synthesis and/or impairedbreakdown, and ventricular unloading decreases cardiac hypertrophy and changesregulation of multiple molecular systems ("reverse cardiac remodeling"), wetested the hypothesis that ventricular unloading alters myocardial UPS.METHODS: In 23 paired myocardial specimens (before and after unloading)ubiquitin, 20S proteasome, and cyclin D1 were investigated immunohistochemically and morphometrically quantified in relation to cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, DNAcontent, nuclear profile area and perimeter, and cyclin D1 protein expression.Moreover, 20S proteasome plasma concentrations were measured by enzyme-linkedimmunoassay (ELISA).RESULTS: In CHF, sarcoplasmic 20S proteasome protein expression was significantlydecreased compared with controls, but significantly increased after unloading. Incontrast, sarcoplasmic ubiquitin protein was increased in CHF but significantlydecreased after unloading, and both variables were inversely correlated.Cardiomyocyte 20S proteasome expression correlated inversely with cell size, meanDNA content, and cyclin D1, whereas ubiquitin protein expression was positivelycorrelated with these parameters. The 20S proteasome plasma concentration wassignificantly increased after unloading.CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that: (1) the UPS is depressed in CHF; and (2)this is reversed by ventricular unloading and associated with decreasedcardiomyocyte hypertrophy, mean DNA content, and cell cycle regulatory proteins. The findings support the view that the UPS is involved in both the pathogenesisof cardiac hypertrophy and "reverse cardiac remodeling" after ventricularunloading.Copyright (c) 2010 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. All rights reserved.