: 25085860  [PubMed - in process]134. Anaesthesist. 2014 Sep;63(8-9):625-35. doi: 10.1007/s00101-014-2362-3.[Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Indications, limitations and practical implementation].[Article in German]Lunz D(1), Philipp A, Dolch M, Born F, Zausig YA.Author information: (1)Klinik für Anaesthesiologie, Universitätsklinik Regensburg,Franz-Josef-Strauß-Allee 11, 93053, Regensburg, Deutschland.Due to the technical advances in pumps, oxygenators and cannulas, veno-arterialextracorporeal membrane oxygenation (va-ECMO) or extracorporeal life support(ECLS) has been widely used in emergency medicine and intensive care medicine forseveral years. An accepted indication is peri-interventional cardiac failure incardiac surgery (postcardiotomy low cardiac output syndrome). Furthermore,especially the use of va-ECMO for other indications in critical care medicine,such as in patients with severe sepsis with septic cardiomyopathy or incardiopulmonary resuscitation has tremendously increased. The basic indicationsfor va-ECMO are therapy refractory cardiac or cardiopulmonary failure. Thefundamental purpose of va-ECMO is bridging the function of the lungs and/or theheart. Consequently, this support system does not represent a causal therapy byitself; however, it provides enough time for the affected organ to recover(bridge to recovery) or for the decision for a long-lasting organ substitution bya ventricular assist device or by transplantation (bridge to decision). Although the outcome for bridged patients seems to be favorable, it should not beforgotten that the support system represents an invasive procedure withpotentially far-reaching complications. Therefore, the initiation of thesesystems needs a professional and experienced (interdisciplinary) team, sufficientresources and an individual approach balancing the risks and benefits. Thisreview gives an overview of the indications, complications and contraindications for va-ECMO. It discusses its advantages in organ transplantation and transportof critically ill patients. The reader will learn the differences betweenperipheral and central cannulation and how to monitor and manage va-ECMO.