: 15366431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1519. J Extra Corpor Technol. 2004 Jun;36(2):169-73.Mechanical circulatory support: reality and dreams experience of a single center.Weitkemper HH(1), El-Banayosy A, Arusoglu L, Sarnowski P, Körfer R.Author information: (1)Heart-Center of Northrhine-Westfalia, Department of Cardio-Thoracic-Surgery,Bad Oeynhausen, Germany. hweitkemper@t-online.deBecause of the increasing number of patients waiting for heart transplantationand the decreasing number of donor organs, mechanical circulatory support hasbecome a generally accepted therapeutic option. Several high-tech devicesdeveloped in the last 15 years differ in terms of location, kind of support, and driving units. They are suitable for different patients and their therapeuticsobjectives. Based on 13 years of experience, we developed a specific protocol forselection and management of patients and devices. Six hundred two patients havereceived mechanical circulatory support (MCS) in our institution since 1987. The indication spectrum includes cardiogenic shock for various reasons: acutemyocarditis, right heart failure, acute rejection and postcardiotomy heartfailure, alternative to transplantation, and bridge to recovery. Eight different systems are in use at our center. The extracorporeal devices, the Biomedicuscentrifugal pump (n = 169) and the Abiomed BVS 5000 (n = 92) are used forshort-term support. The Thoratec VAD (n = 179), and Medos HIA-VAD (n = 10)located in paracorporeal position preferably used for midterm support. NovacorLVAS (n= 96), and HeartMate (n = 58) are partially implantable systems used forlong-term ventricular assistance in patients who did not require biventricularsupport. The advantage of the implantable devices is the option of dischargingpatients under support if they fulfill special criteria before being dischargedto home. Eighty-five LVAD patients were discharged home with support, Novacor (n = 52), HeartMate (n = 27), ThoratecTLC-II (n = 8), Lionheart (n = 3) fulfill our criteria for being discharged home while on support. Careful postoperativepatient management does not exclude a variety of complications. Bleeding:occurred in 22-35% of patients, right heart failure in 15-26%, neurologicdisorder in 7-28%, infection in 7-30%, and liver failure in 11-20%. Complicationsvaried with different devices, and the patients' preoperative conditions.Eighty-five patients fulfilled the criteria of our out of hospital program (OOH) and were discharged from hospital for a mean period of 184 days. Readmission was necessary for complications caused by thromboembolism and infection. This report describes our patient device selection criteria as a bridge to transplantsetting.