: 1457936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2066. Ann Thorac Surg. 1992 Jun;53(6):1080-90.Multicenter clinical evaluation of the HeartMate 1000 IP left ventricular assist device.Frazier OH(1), Rose EA, Macmanus Q, Burton NA, Lefrak EA, Poirier VL, Dasse KA.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Texas Heart Institute, Houston77225-0345.The Thermo Cardiosystems Inc (Woburn, MA) HeartMate 1000 IP left ventricularassist device (LVAD) has been evaluated as a bridge to transplantation in 34patients for up to 324 days at seven clinical centers in the United States.Sixty-five percent of the patients underwent transplantation, 80% of whom weredischarged from the hospital. Six additional control patients, transplantcandidates who met the entrance criteria but who did not receive the device, werealso included in the study. Although 3 (50%) of the control patients receivedtransplants, all 6 died within 77 days of having met the LVAD inclusion criteria (100% mortality). Complications resulting from use of the device were comparable with those previously reported for all ventricular assist devices, except forthromboembolic events: bleeding, 39%; infection, 25%; and right heart failure,21%. No device-related thromboembolic events occurred, although 1 patientexperienced an event related to a mechanical aortic valve in the native heart.None of the complications had a significant negative association with outcome of the patient except for right heart failure. All survivors had a significantimprovement in hepatic function before transplantation. Total bilirubin valueswere reduced by 60% during LVAD support. No significant differences were observedwhen total bilirubin values were compared at 30 and 60 days after LVAD supportand at 30 and 60 days after transplantation in a cohort of 15 patients (p greaterthan 0.05). The improvement in renal function was less predictable than that ofhepatic function. Creatinine values decreased significantly beforetransplantation; however, the values measured at 30 and 60 days aftertransplantation were higher than those measured at the same intervals after LVAD support had been initiated, and this increase is presumably related to theimmunosuppressive drugs. In conclusion, the HeartMate 1000 IP LVAD has been shownto be effective in supporting end-stage cardiomyopathy patients totransplantation. Thromboembolism, previously regarded as a serious complicationwith such devices, has not been a problem with this device. Additional patientsare being enrolled into the study to further document the safety andeffectiveness of this technology.