: 24621838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]230. JACC Heart Fail. 2013 Feb;1(1):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2012.11.001. Epub 2013Feb 4.Unplanned hospital readmissions after HeartMate II implantation: frequency, risk factors, and impact on resource use and survival.Smedira NG(1), Hoercher KJ(2), Lima B(3), Mountis MM(4), Starling RC(4), ThuitaL(5), Schmuhl DM(2), Blackstone EH(6).Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and VascularInstitute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. Electronic address:smidern@ccf.org. (2)Kaufman Center for Heart Failure, Cleveland Clinic,Cleveland, Ohio. (3)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (4)Department ofCardiovascular Medicine, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic,Cleveland, Ohio. (5)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, ResearchInstitute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (6)Department of Thoracic andCardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic,Cleveland, Ohio; Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to identify potential areas for qualityimprovement and cost containment. We investigated readmissions after HeartMate IIleft ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation by characterizing their type, temporal frequency, causative factors, and resource use and survival afterreadmission.BACKGROUND: The HeartMate II LVAD provides enhanced survival and quality of life to end-stage heart failure patients. Whether these improved outcomes areaccompanied by a similar reduction in unplanned hospital readmissions is largely unknown.METHODS: From October 2004 to January 2010, 118 patients received a HeartMate II,of whom 92 were discharged on device support. Subsequent readmissions wereanalyzed using prospectively maintained clinical and financial databases.RESULTS: Forty-eight patients (52%) had 177 unplanned hospital readmissions, 87non-LVAD- and 90 LVAD-associated. Reasons for non-LVAD-associated readmissionsincluded medical management of comorbidities and progression of cardiac pathology(n = 48), neuropsychiatric/psychosocial issues (n = 22), and infections (n = 17).Those for LVAD-associated readmissions included device component infection (n =51), management of nontherapeutic anticoagulation or device malfunction (n = 22),and bleeding (n = 15). Cumulative incidence of unplanned readmissions was higher (p < 0.0001) for destination therapy than bridge-to-transplant patients(9/patient vs. 4/patient at 24 months). Cumulative hospital days overall were 25 and 42 at 12 and 18 months, respectively, and the costs were 18% and 29% ofinitial implantation costs. Increased number of unplanned readmissions waspredictive of mortality.CONCLUSIONS: Unplanned readmissions are common during HeartMate II support andnegatively affect resource use and survival. Refining patient selection,especially in destination therapy patients, reducing infectious and bleedingcomplications, and increasing awareness about these devices might reduceunnecessary readmissions.Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by ElsevierInc. All rights reserved.