: 9402511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1905. Jpn Circ J. 1997 Nov;61(11):887-92.Treatment of endstage heart disease with mechanical circulatory assistance.Argenziano M(1), DeRose JJ, Oz MC, Rose EA.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, N.Y. 10032, USA.A great number of patients suffer and die from the sequelae of acute and chronic heart failure each year. Although advances in medical and surgical therapy havebenefited many of these patients, the majority suffer from disease refractory to any definitive therapy. For these patients, cardiac transplantation is the onlyremaining hope. Unfortunately, because of the increasing demand for donor organs in the face of a fixed and limited supply, this option is only available to asmall percentage of these patients. Even in patients accepted fortransplantation, a significant waiting list mortality has been observed. Avariety of ventricular assist devices (VAD) have been developed since the firstsuccessful case of mechanical cardiac assistance over 30 years ago. These devicesdiffer in basic mechanical function, method of insertion, and degree ofimplantability, and thus have different indications and potential applications.While the intra-aortic balloon pump and centrifugal pumps are effectiveshort-term support modalities, extracorporeal and implantable pulsatile deviceshave been used successfully for long-term support of patients with reversible andnon-reversible cardiac failure. These pumps have most commonly been utilized asbridges to transplantation, but increasing clinical experience has supported the notion of long-term mechanical assistance as a definitive therapy for endstageheart disease. While complications, particularly infection and thromboembolism,pose significant challenges and long-term device reliability remains to be fully determined, available implantable devices seem capable of providing effectivelong-term support. As data is obtained from currently ongoing trials comparingVAD support to medical therapy for endstage heart failure, ethical and economicissues will assume increasing importance.