: 21394530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]835. Crit Care. 2011;15(2):R93. doi: 10.1186/cc10098. Epub 2011 Mar 10.Acute and critically ill peripartum cardiomyopathy and 'bridge to' therapeuticoptions: a single center experience with intra-aortic balloon pump, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and continuous-flow left ventricular assistdevices.Gevaert S(1), Van Belleghem Y, Bouchez S, Herck I, De Somer F, De Block Y, Tromp F, Vandecasteele E, Martens F, De Pauw M.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiology, Heart Center, Ghent University Hospital, DePintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. sofie.gevaert@ugent.beINTRODUCTION: Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) patients refractory to medicaltherapy and intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) counterpulsation or in whom weaning from these therapies is impossible, are candidates for a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) as a bridge to recovery or transplant. Continuous-flow LVADs aresmaller, have a better long-term durability and are associated with betteroutcomes. Extra corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) can be used as a temporary support in patients with refractory cardiogenic shock. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of mechanical support in acute and criticallyill PPCM patients.METHODS: This was a retrospective search of the patient database of the GhentUniversity hospital (2000 to 2010).RESULTS: Six PPCM-patients were treated with mechanical support. Three patientspresented in the postpartum period and three patients at the end of pregnancy.All were treated with IABP, the duration of IABP support ranged from 1 to 13days. An ECMO was inserted in one patient who presented with cardiogenic shock,multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and a stillborn baby. Two patients showedpartial recovery and could be weaned off the IABP. Four patients were implantedwith a continuous-flow LVAD (HeartMate II, Thoratec Inc.), including theECMO-patient. Three LVAD patients were successfully transplanted 78, 126 and 360 days after LVAD implant; one patient is still on the transplant waiting list. We observed one peripheral thrombotic complication due to IABP and five earlybleeding complications in three LVAD patients. One patient died suddenly twoyears after transplantation.CONCLUSIONS: In PPCM with refractory heart failure IABP was safe and efficient asa bridge to recovery or as a bridge to LVAD. ECMO provided temporary support as abridge to LVAD, while the newer continuous-flow LVADs offered a safe bridge totransplant.PMCID: PMC3219357