: 22689932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]619. Psychosom Med. 2012 Jun;74(5):554-8. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e318258853a.Psychiatric evaluation of children and adolescents with left ventricular assistdevices.Ozbaran B(1), Kose S, Yagdi T, Engin C, Erermis S, Uysal T, Ayik F, Karakula S,Ulger Z, Atay Y, Ozbaran M.Author information: (1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, EgeUniversity, Bornova Izmir, Turkey. drbbeker@yahoo.comOBJECTIVES: To evaluate the psychiatric symptoms of children equipped with aventricular assist device (VAD) and follow them up for 6 months. With theshortage of donor hearts available for the treatment of end-stage heart failure, VADs have been used to provide temporary treatment until a heart becomesavailable. VADs provide external sources of power for mechanical circulatorysupport and are capable of sustaining life over weeks and months. This studyprovides preliminary details about the psychiatric symptoms and disorders of the first eight children equipped with a VAD in Turkey.METHODS: Eight pediatric patients who recently underwent VAD implantation, aged 1to 16 years, were evaluated using the Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders andSchizophrenia, Child Behavior Checklist, Children's Depression Inventory, BeckDepression Inventory, and State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children and followedup for 6 months.RESULTS: In the first evaluation, five participants had a psychiatric disorderdiagnosis. Two patients had adjustment disorder with depressive and anxietysymptoms; one had anxiety disorder, not otherwise specified; and two had majordepressive disorder. The anxiety and depressive symptom levels in questionnaires were consistent with psychiatric diagnoses. Two patients had hearttransplantation during the follow-up period.CONCLUSIONS: To determine and treat psychiatric symptoms and disorders at anearlier stage, it is important for children and adolescents with a VAD and those who have undergone heart transplantation to be evaluated by a multidisciplinaryconsultation liaison team including psychiatrists, psychologists, consultantnurses, and counselors.