: 24443515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]267. J Korean Med Sci. 2014 Jan;29(1):137-40. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2014.29.1.137. Epub2013 Dec 26.The successful implantation of continuous-flow left ventricular assist device as a destination therapy in Korea: echocardiographic assessment.Lee GY(1), Park SJ(1), Kim S(2), Choi N(3), Jeong DS(4), Jeon ES(5), Lee YT(4).Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center,Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ; CardiovascularImaging Center, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School ofMedicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Cardiovascular Imaging Center, Samsung Medical Center,Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Cardiac and VascularCenter, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, SamsungMedical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ;Cardiac and Vascular Center, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan UniversitySchool of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Division of Cardiology, Department ofMedicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,Seoul, Korea. ; Cardiac and Vascular Center, Samsung Medical Center, SungkyunkwanUniversity School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is a good treatment option for the patientsineligible for cardiac transplantation. Several studies have demonstrated that a ventricular assist device improves the quality of life and prognosis of thepatients with end-stage heart failure. A 75-yr-old man debilitated with New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class III-IV due to severe left ventricularsystolic dysfunction received LVAD implantation as a destination therapy. Thepatient was discharged with improved functional status (NYHA functional class II)after appropriate cardiac rehabilitation and education about how to manage thedevice and potential emergency situations. This is the first case of successfulcontinuous-flow LVAD implantation as a destination therapy in Korea.PMCID: PMC3890465