: 15848333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1473. J Card Fail. 2004 Dec;10(6 Suppl):S225-33.Worldwide clinical experience with the CorCap Cardiac Support Device.Starling RC(1), Jessup M.Author information: (1)Section of Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplant Medicine, Kaufman Center forHeart Failure, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio44195, USA.It has been hypothesized that the mechanical burden associated with LV remodelingleads to increased myocardial wall stress and adverse remodeling, all of whichserve to further impair cardiac performance and contribute to diseaseprogression. The CorCap Cardiac Support Device (CSD) (Acorn Cardiovascular, Inc.,St. Paul, Minnesota) is a mesh-like device that is surgically implanted aroundthe heart. The device is designed to provide circumferential myocardial wallsupport, and reduce wall stress and myocyte stretch. Clinical experience withCorCap CSD implants in patients with heart failure can be divided into 3 phases: (1) initial safety studies, (2) randomized controlled trials, and (3) limitedmarketed release. Initial safety studies were undertaken in 48 patients recruitedbetween April 1999 and April of 2001. In 11 patients with complete follow-up, it was noted that LV size, as measured by LV end-diastolic dimension, significantly decreased as early as 3 months postimplant, with an even greater reduction at 6months. Most importantly, this benefit was sustained, so that the LVend-diastolic dimension stayed smaller at 1, 2, and 3 years of follow-up. Therewas also an improvement in LV function, as manifested by changes in LV ejectionfraction. Ejection fraction was significantly increased by 3 months and appeared to reach a peak improvement by 6 months. This benefit was likewise maintained at 1, 2, and 3 years postsurgery. Hemodynamic data did not show any evidence ofconstrictive physiology. These preliminary safety studies had shown that theCorCap CSD could be implanted safely and without excess operative morbidity ormortality. The primary objective of the Acorn Randomized Clinical Trial is toassess the efficacy and safety of the CorCap CSD in patients with advanced heart failure despite optimal medical therapy. A randomized trial with 2 arms (mitralvalve surgery randomized to CSD and cardiomyopathy randomized to medical therapy alone or with CSD) enrolled 300 patients. The primary endpoint of the trial is a change in clinical status from baseline to the end of the efficacy phase asdetermined by a clinical composite score. The Acorn CorCap CSD received CE markapproval in Europe in 2001 and has been available to a small number of centers ina Limited Market Release Surveillance Study (LMRSS).