: 17489679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1297. J Extra Corpor Technol. 2007 Mar;39(1):49-52.Successful management of a left ventricular assist device malfunction in anoutpatient setting.Cournoyer K(1), Russo L, Froebe S, Groom R.Author information: (1)Maine Medical Center, Portland 04102, USA.Heart disease kills as many people as nearly all other causes of death combined. Chronic, progressive, end-stage heart failure results in substantial health care costs and immeasurable suffering for both individuals in particular and societyin general. Ventricular assist devices are having an increasing role insupporting patients with severe circulatory compromise. These devices providesupport and make it possible for patients to be discharged from the hospital and returned to their communities. System failures and device malfunctions do occurand are the most common cause of death for patients on device support. We presenta device malfunction involving a HeartMate XVE Bridge to Transplant that occurredwhile the patient was at his home, > 100 mi. from our center. The patient wasplaced on a HeartMate after a re-operative coronary artery bypass surgery. He wasdischarged to his home on day 43 after device implant. On the 447thpost-operative day, two "Red Heart" alarms occurred. After initiating handpumping of the device, the patient's companion contacted our center, and thelocal Emergency Medical Service was activated. The patient was transported byhelicopter to the Maine Medical Center, where he was placed on a backup pneumaticconsole and subsequently transferred to a Boston transplant center. The patientsubsequently underwent cardiac transplantation. It is imperative to have adefinitive strategy and clear support plan to address device malfunctions andsystem failures. Considering the growing number of ventricular assist devicepatients discharged home, these occurrences will be more common outside of thehospital setting. Education of clinicians, patients, and their companions, aswell as local rescue teams and community hospitals, is essential for successfuloutcomes and continued quality of life.