: 3041934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2142. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1988 Jul;96(1):72-80.Follow-up of survivors of mechanical circulatory support.Kanter KR(1), Ruzevich SA, Pennington DG, McBride LR, Swartz MT, Willman VL.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, St. Louis University Medical Center, Mo.Improvements in mechanical support for profound circulatory collapse haveresulted in increasing survival of these critically ill patients. Since 1980, 27 patients aged 3 days to 69 years (mean 34.9 years) who required mechanicalcirculatory assistance have been followed up after discharge from the hospital.The refractory cardiogenic shock necessitating mechanical support occurredpostoperatively in 22 patients (coronary artery bypass in nine, valve replacementin four, correction of congenital heart defects in nine) and with end-stagecardiomyopathy in five. Fourteen patients were supported with a Pierce-Donachyventricular assist device (left ventricular assist in seven, right ventricularassist in three, both in four); nine were supported with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, two with a Medtronic centrifugal left ventricular assist pump, onewith biventricular Biomedicus pumps, and one with a Novacor left ventricularassist system. The duration of support ranged from 8 hours to 91 days with a meanof 3.5 days in patients supported for postoperative shock. Major complicationsoccurred in 18 patients (67%), including bleeding that necessitated operativeexploration in 14, serious infection in five, renal failure in two, and stroke intwo. The five patients with cardiomyopathy underwent cardiac transplantation. Theremaining 22 patients who had postoperative cardiogenic shock were weaned fromsupport. There have been four late deaths: two cardiac related at 6 months andtwo of cancer at 46 and 53 months (one patient was in New York Heart Association class I and the other in class II before death). The remaining 23 survivors have been followed up for 3 to 79 months (mean 29 months) and at last examination 17(74%) were in class I, two (9%) were in class II, three (13%) were in class III, and one (4%) was in class IV. Eight patients are employed full time, three areretired, four attend school, three are in preschool, one is a housewife, and one is unemployed but free of symptoms. Only four patients have significant cardiacdisability, and one of these still works. In conclusion, mechanical circulatoryassistance allows adequate support to permit satisfactory long-term survival inpatients with refractory cardiogenic shock.