: 19156239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1131. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2008 Nov;91(5):327-34.Hemodynamic performance and inflammatory response during the use of VAD-InCor as a bridge to transplant.[Article in English, Portuguese]Galantier J(1), Moreira LF, Benício A, Leirner AA, Cestari I, Bocchi EA, Bacal F,Stolf NA.Author information: (1)Instituto do Coração, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina,Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil. galantier@terra.com.brBACKGROUND: Cardiac transplantation faces the serious problem of lack of donorsand it is estimated that 20 to 40% of the patients die while waiting for hearttransplantation. For these patients, the use of mechanical circulatory assistdevices is the only choice of survival while waiting for a donor. In Brazil, the experience with mechanical circulatory support is limited and there is no regularprogram regarding the use of these devices as a bridge to heart transplantation.OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the hemodynamic performance and the systemic inflammatory response during the clinical use of the InCor-type ventricular assist device(VAD-InCor) as a bridge to heart transplantation.METHODS: Between October 2003 and April 2006, 11 patients in the waiting list forheart transplantation presented hemodynamic deterioration due to refractorycardiogenic shock. Seven of these patients were submitted to VAD-InCorimplantation for left ventricular assistance. The etiologic diagnosis was Chagas'disease in 5 patients and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy in 2.RESULTS: The duration of left ventricular assistance ranged from 14 to 42 days(mean 26.2 days). During this period, the hemodynamic performance of theDAV-InCor was adequate to support a normal hemodynamic state. There wasnormalization of central venous oxygen saturation and serum lactate. Two patientswere submitted to heart transplantation, while the other 5 patients died underassistance due to infection and multiple organ failure.CONCLUSION: The performance of the VAD-InCor, in the hemodynamic behavior of the studied patients, was adequate for the maintenance of a satisfactory circulatory state during the studied period. There was improvement in the tissue perfusionparameters and maintenance of systemic inflammatory response signs. There was ahigh incidence of complications; however, complications related to the device,which could compromise the safety of its use, were not demonstrated.