: 23399974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]492. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2013 Feb;14(2):110-9. doi: 10.1714/1218.13523.[Proposal for updated listing criteria for heart transplantation and indications to implant of left ventricular assist devices].[Article in Italian]Ammirati E(1), Oliva F, Colombo T, Botta L, Cipriani M, Cannata A, Verde A,Turazza FM, Russo CF, Paino R, Martinelli L, Frigerio M.Author information: (1)Dipartimento Cardiotoracovascolare, A.O Ospedale Niguarda Ca'Granda, Milano.Heart transplantation (HTx) is considered to be the gold standard treatment foradvanced heart failure (HF) but it is available only for a minority of patients, due to paucity of donor hearts (278 HTx were performed in 2011 in Italy).Patients listed for HTx have a prolonged waiting time (that is about 2.3 years inthe 2006-2010 time period in Italy) that is superior compared with patients whoreceive HTx (median time around 6 months), to underline the presence of anallocation system that prioritizes candidates in critical conditions. Patientslisted for HTx have a poor quality of life and their annual mortality is around8-10%. Another 10-15% of HTx candidates are removed from the waiting list eachyear because they are no longer suitable for transplantation. On the other hand, continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) have been demonstrated toimprove survival and quality of life of patients with advanced/refractory HF.LVAD therapy can represent a valid alternative to HTx, and it is recommended for patients with advanced HF in the recent edition of the European Society ofCardiology guidelines on HF management. In the United States, a larger number of centers compared with European ones started to apply a strategy of LVAD implantfor many patients who meet clinical criteria for listing for HTx. Data from ourcenter concerning the last 6 years of LVAD implant (51 implants since 2006)reported a 75.5% survival rate at 1 year. In Italian series, as in our center,current HTx survival is only slightly superior (83% survival rate at 1 year),based on data from the Italian National Transplant Center. We report a proposalfor updated listing criteria for HTx and indications for LVAD implant in patientswith advanced acute and chronic HF. Criteria for identifying suitable patientsfor HTx and/or LVAD considering the shortage of donors are discussed.