: 23373528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]494. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013 Aug;44(2):213-6. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezt014. Epub2013 Jan 30.Implantable left ventricular assist devices as initial therapy for refractorypostmyocardial infarction cardiogenic shock.Pawale A(1), Pinney S, Ashley K, Flynn R, Milla F, Anyanwu AC.Author information: (1)Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY 10029, USA.Comment in    Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013 Aug;44(2):217-8.OBJECTIVES: Recently, the initial therapy for refractory cardiogenic shock haslargely been based on use of short-term mechanical devices with later conversion to durable options. The premise is that such patients cannot toleratecardiopulmonary bypass and the extended surgery needed for implantable leftventricular assist device (LVAD) placement. We have adopted an alternativestrategy to implant long-term LVADs as the initial device therapy in suchpatients.METHODS: Over a 3 year period, we used implantable LVADs (Jarvik 2000, one;Ventrassist, one; Heartmate XVE, two; and Heartmate II, nine) in 13 patients (11 men and two women; mean age 54 years) with postmyocardial infarction shockwithout prior use of a short-term LVAD. The median time interval from myocardial infarction to LVAD implantation was 3.5 days. Eight patients were on aventilator, two had unknown neurological status and four had suffered cardiacarrest in the preceding 24 h. Two had prior coronary artery bypass graft. Ninehad received dual antiplatelet therapy postmyocardial infarction. The meanlaboratory value of creatinine was 1.5 mg/dl, alanine aminotransferase 748 U/l,international normalized ratio 1.5 and lactate 3.2 mmol/l. One procedure wascarried out off pump; for the others, the mean cardiopulmonary bypass time was 72min. Right ventricular assist devices were used in two cases and were laterexplanted.RESULTS: One patient died of progressive multiorgan failure. All others survived to hospital discharge. There were no re-explorations for bleeding or majorinfectious complications; two patients had perioperative stroke. The medianduration of mechanical ventilation, intensive care unit stay and hospital staywas 3, 9 and 18 days, respectively. At 1 year, of the 12 survivors, eight havesince had heart transplant, one patient underwent device explant, two remainedalive on support and one died 7 months post-LVAD.CONCLUSIONS: Our data challenge the notion that patients in refractorycardiogenic shock are too ill to tolerate immediate placement of implantableLVADs. Despite the surgical challenges, a one-stop implantable LVAD approach for cardiogenic shock is feasible and may offer unique advantages over thebridge-to-bridge approach because it avoids the incremental costs,hospitalization and morbidity associated with repeated interventions.