: 16293049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1437. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005 Oct;130(4):1122-9.Long-term support of 9 patients with the DeBakey VAD for more than 200 days.Wilhelm MJ(1), Hammel D, Schmid C, Rhode A, Kaan T, Rothenburger M, Stypmann J,Schäfers M, Schmidt C, Baba HA, Scheld HH.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, WestfalianWilhelms-University, Muenster, Germany. markus.wilhelm@swissonline.chComment in    J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 Jul;132(1):210; author reply 210-1.OBJECTIVE: Pulsatile left ventricular assist devices serving as mechanicalcirculatory support for patients with end-stage heart failure are associated withcomplications, including bleeding, thromboembolism, and infection. Axial-flowpumps might overcome some of these shortcomings. Here we report our experiencewith long-term application of the DeBakey VAD (MicroMed Technology, Inc, Houston,Tex).METHODS: Nine male transplant candidates (37 +/- 14 years) with severehemodynamic compromise (cardiac index, 1.6 +/- 0.5 L . min(-1) x m(-2); pulmonarycapillary wedge pressure, 27 +/- 6 mm Hg) and beginning end-organ failure despiteinotropic and intra-aortic balloon pump support received the DeBakey VAD.Clinical outcome was evaluated.RESULTS: Cumulative support was 7.8 years, and the mean duration of support was314 +/- 75 days (range, 229-438 days). Eight patients were transplanted, and one died from intracerebral bleeding. Peripheral circulation and end-organ functionrecovered rapidly after implantation. Continuous flow was able to maintainadequate organ perfusion over the long term. Eight patients were dischargedduring support, with good quality of life. There were no early bleedings, butthere were late bleedings in 3 patients caused by excessive anticoagulation andplatelet inhibition. Neurologic events occurred in 4 patients. Three patientsrecovered completely from symptoms, and one had lethal intracerebral bleeding.Because of thrombus formation, the device was exchanged in 4 patients. Withincreasing experience, thrombolysis was performed in similar situations. All suchpatients underwent successful transplantation. Hemolysis occurred, with eventsindicating thrombus formation. Device-related infection was found in one patient.CONCLUSIONS: The DeBakey VAD demonstrated its potential for long-term bridge totransplantation. The risk for thrombus formation needs to be addressed byimprovement of pump technology and new strategies for platelet inhibition.