: 23868320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]391. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013 Aug;32(8):815-22. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2013.05.019.Partial mechanical circulatory support in an ovine model of post-infarctionremodeling.Geens JH(1), Jacobs S, Claus P, Trenson S, Leunens V, Vantichelen I, Rega FR,Verbeken EK, Burkhoff D, Meyns B.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.jefgeens1979@gmail.comBACKGROUND: Full unloading of the left ventricle (LV) in chronic heart failure(CHF) induces reversal of LV dilation and geometric distortion. In this study we describe the partial unloading effects in ischemic CHF.METHODS: Six weeks after myocardial infarction, sheep were randomized to partial support ("pump," n = 5), as provided by the CircuLite Synergy micro-pump, or tono therapy ("sham," n = 6) for an additional 6 weeks. At baseline, and at 6 and12 weeks after infarction, pressure-volume (PV) recordings were made. Systolicand diastolic functions were characterized by the end-systolic volume (ESV) whereLV end-systolic pressure reached 90 mm Hg (V90), and the end-diastolic volume(EDV) where LV end-diastolic pressure reached 15 mm Hg (V15), respectively.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 6 and 12 weeks after infarction.During autopsy at 12 weeks, isolated LVs were weighed. Histologically, the degreeof fibrosis in the non-infarcted area was assessed using systematic randomizedsampling, and myocyte hypertrophy was measured by the mean linear interceptmethod.RESULTS: At 6 weeks, PV measurements showed a V90 and V15 increase (p = NSbetween groups). Six weeks later, V90 and V15 increased in the sham group. In thepump group, V90 decreased but V15 did not change significantly. At 6 weeks, MRIindicated no significant difference between groups. Six weeks later, in the sham group, EDV and ESV increased significantly. In the pump group, EDV decreasedsignificantly and ESV trended to decrease. Sphericity index increased in the shamgroup and decreased in the pump group, although not significantly. Explanted LVmasses were significantly higher in the sham group than in the pump group. Thepump group had a decrease in fibrosis and less myocyte hypertrophy.CONCLUSION: Partial support 6 weeks after major myocardial infarction halts andreverses ventricular dilation and hypertrophy.Copyright © 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. Allrights reserved.