: 16754798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1387. N C Med J. 2006 Mar-Apr;67(2):110-5.Implantable left ventricular assist devices: new hope for patients with end-stageheart failure.Milano CA(1), Lodge AJ, Blue LJ, Smith PK, Felker GM, Hernandez AF, Rosenberg PB,Rogers JG.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. milan002@mc.duke.eduComment in    N C Med J. 2006 Mar-Apr;67(2):116-7.INTRODUCTION: Recently, the Food and Drug Administration approved implantableleft ventricular assist devices (LVAD) as destination therapy (DT) for end-stage heart failure patients who are ineligible for cardiac transplantation.OBJECTIVE AND STUDY DESIGN: This is a case series that describes the earlyresults with DT LVAD at Duke University Medical Center (DUMC). An additionalobjective is to provide general information to a broad group of caregivers onthis LVAD therapy, which is a new and developing treatment option. DATASOURCE/COLLECTION METHODS: Pretreatment clinical condition and outcomes data werecollected retrospectively on this cohort of patients through chart review.Outcomes in our patients are compared to data from prior studies and established databases.PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Since approval of this therapy two years ago, 18 patientshave been treated with implantable LVAD as DT at DUMC. The primary reason forineligibility for transplant was advanced age (median age was 66). Nearly all of the patients (89%) were confined to the hospital requiring continuous inotropicinfusions or temporary mechanical support (e.g., intra-aortic balloon pump) priorto LVAD. The 30-day survival following LVAD implantation was 94.5%; one-yearsurvival was 60%. Eighty-nine percent of patients were successfully discharged toindependent living. Operative mortality is similar to that of other cardiacsurgery procedures performed on patients with advanced heart failure, whileduration of intensive care stay and hospitalization remain considerably longer.PRINCIPAL LIMITATIONS: The principal limitation of this review is the absence of a control group of patients with end-stage heart failure who receivedconventional therapies. For this reason, the DT LVAD outcomes are compared toprior studies and database results.CONCLUSION: Implantable LVAD therapy provides new hope for end-stage heartfailure patients who do not qualify for cardiac transplantation.