: 17062964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1348. Ann Thorac Surg. 2006 Nov;82(5):1774-8.Does continuous flow left ventricular assist device technology have a positiveimpact on outcome pretransplant and posttransplant?Klotz S(1), Stypmann J, Welp H, Schmid C, Drees G, Rukosujew A, Scheld HH.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University HospitalMuenster, Muenster, Germany. stefan.klotz@ukmuenster.deBACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) with continuous flowproperties are increasingly used to bridge heart failure patients to cardiactransplantation. Advantages in comparison with the pulsatile LVADs are smallersize, better endurance, and lower thromboembolic events. However, whether thesenew pumps have similar pre- and posttransplant outcomes is not clear.METHODS: Fifty patients with a continuous flow device (Micromed DeBakey, Houston,TX or InCor BerlinHeart, Berlin, Germany) were compared with an age-, disease-,and LVAD duration-matched control group (n = 80) supported with a pulsatiledevice (Novacor, WorldHeart, Oakland, CA or HeartMate, Thoratec Corp, Pleasanton,CA).RESULTS: Age (44.3 +/- 13.4 vs 46.1 +/- 11.1 years), disease (idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, 58% vs 65%), and LVAD duration (138 +/- 131 vs 128 +/- 106 days) were comparable in both groups. Successful bridging to transplantation wassimilar with continuous flow in comparison with pulsatile device support (52% vs 56%, p = not significant [NS]). Thirty-day mortality after cardiactransplantation in patients with continuous flow LVAD support was 21.7% vs 22.2% with pulsatile LVADs (p = NS). Reasons for death were similar among the differentLVAD groups. Long-term survival was similar in both LVAD groups compared withpatients without previous LVAD support. Interestingly, severe rejections weresignificantly more frequent in patients with a continuous flow LVAD (p < 0.001).CONCLUSIONS: The new generation of cardiac assist devices with continuous flowpattern has a similar rate of pre- and posttransplant mortality in comparisonwith pulsatile LVADs. However, the rate and severity of posttransplant rejection was significantly higher in the group with continuous flow devices. Furtherstudies are warranted to explain the higher rate of severe rejections.