: 23314865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]506. J Biomech. 2013 Jan 18;46(2):266-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2012.11.032. Epub2013 Jan 7.The Syncardia(™) total artificial heart: in vivo, in vitro, and computationalmodeling studies.Slepian MJ(1), Alemu Y, Girdhar G, Soares JS, Smith RG, Einav S, Bluestein D.Author information: (1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY,USA. chairman.syns@gmail.comErratum in    J Biomech. 2013 Apr 26;46(7):1414. Girdhar, Gaurav [added].The SynCardia(™) total artificial heart (TAH) is the only FDA-approved TAH in theworld. The SynCardia(™) TAH is a pneumatically driven, pulsatile system capableof flows of >9L/min. The TAH is indicated for use as a bridge to transplantation (BTT) in patients at imminent risk of death from non-reversible bi-ventricularfailure. In the Pivotal US approval trial the TAH achieved a BTT rate of >79%.Recently a multi-center, post-market approval study similarly demonstrated acomparable BTT rate. A major milestone was recently achieved for the TAH, withover 1100 TAHs having been implanted to date, with the bulk of implantationoccurring at an ever increasing rate in the past few years. The TAH is mostcommonly utilized to save the lives of patients dying from end-stagebi-ventricular heart failure associated with ischemic or non-ischemic dilatedcardiomyopathy. Beyond progressive chronic heart failure, the TAH hasdemonstrated great efficacy in supporting patients with acute irreversible heart failure associated with massive acute myocardial infarction. In recent yearsseveral diverse clinical scenarios have also proven to be well served by the TAH including severe heart failure associated with advanced congenital heart disease.failed or burned-out transplants, infiltrative and restrictive cardiomyopathiesand failed ventricular assist devices. Looking to the future a major unmet needremains in providing total heart support for children and small adults. As such, the present TAH design must be scaled to fit the smaller patient, while providingequivalent, if not superior flow characteristics, shear profiles and overalldevice thrombogenicity. To aid in the development of a new "pediatric," TAH anengineering methodology known as "Device Thrombogenicity Emulation (DTE)", thatwe have recently developed and described, is being employed. Recently, to furtherour engineering understanding of the TAH, as steps towards next generationdesigns we have: (1) assessed of the degree of platelet reactivity induced by thepresent clinical 70 cc TAH using a closed loop platelet activity state assay, (2)modeled the motion of the TAH pulsatile mobile diaphragm, and (3) performedfluid-structure interactions and assessment of the flow behavior through inflowand outflow regions of the TAH fitted with modern bi-leaflet heart valves.Developing a range of TAH devices will afford biventricular replacement therapyto a wide range of patients, for both short and long-term therapy.Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.PMCID: PMC4162530