: 7863708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2034. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1994;8(10):537-40.Mechanical circulatory support in children.Scheinin SA(1), Radovancevic B, Parnis SM, Ott DA, Bricker JT, Towbin JA,Abou-Awdi NL, Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiopulmonary Transplantation, Texas Heart Institute, Houston77225-0345.Nine children (aged 1.2-15 years) have been treated with mechanical circulatorysupport devices at our institution. Indications for treatment were acute cardiac allograft rejection (n = 4), postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock (n = 4), and bridgeto cardiac transplantation (n = 1). Eight patients required left ventricularsupport, and one required biventricular support. A BioMedicus centrifugal pumpwas used in eight patients, and a Hemopump intra-aortic axial flow device wasused in one patient. In two patients, an intra-aortic balloon pump was in placeat the time that circulatory support was instituted. Mechanical support timeranged from 2 to 139 h, and the average flow index was 2.31 l/min per m2. Threepatients required hemodialysis during support, and one patient requiredre-exploration because of mediastinal hemorrhage. Recovery of native ventricular function was assessed by transthoracic or transesophageal echocardiography, andweaning from the device was achieved by gradually decreasing pump flow inincrements of 0.1 to 0.5 l/min. Seven patients were successfully weaned fromsupport. Two hospital deaths occurred after circulatory support had beendiscontinued: one patient died of respiratory failure and the other ofgram-negative pneumonia and sepsis. The five surviving patients experienced nosignificant complications, and their hemodynamic indices were normal at the time of discharge. At a mean follow-up of 28.8 months, these patients are leadingactive unrestricted lives, with no long-term device-related sequelae. Based onthis experience, mechanical circulatory support is feasible in children whoexperience profound circulatory failure from a variety of causes.