: 10198722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1865. J Card Fail. 1999 Mar;5(1):31-7.Intravenous thyroid hormone supplementation in heart failure with cardiogenicshock.Malik FS(1), Mehra MR, Uber PA, Park MH, Scott RL, Van Meter CH.Author information: (1)Ochsner Cardiomyopathy and Heart Transplantation Center, Ochsner MedicalInstitutions, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormone level abnormalities commonly exist in severe heartfailure and may be of prognostic value. The therapeutic potential of usingthyroid hormone for cardiogenic shock resulting from progressive heart failurehas not been previously delineated. We sought to evaluate the role of anintravenous infusion of thyroxine as an adjunct to conventional inotropic agents and intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in patients with severe heart failurewith cardiogenic shock.METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied 10 consecutive patients with severe systolicheart failure that progressed to a cardiogenic shock state unresponsive toconventional pharmacological inotropic measures. Intravenous thyroxine (20micrograms/h) was used as an adjunctive salvage measure after the failure ofconventional pharmacological and mechanical support by intra-aortic balloon pump.The invasive hemodynamic profile (right atrial pressure, pulmonary capillarywedge pressure, cardiac index, mean arterial pressure), overall clinical status, core temperature, renal function, and tachyarrhythmias were compared before andsequentially at 6, 24, and 36 hours after the initiation of thyroxineadministration. Long-term outcome was also defined. All patients hadstatistically significant improvements in cardiac index, pulmonary capillarywedge pressure, and mean arterial pressure at 24 and 36 hours post-initiation of thyroxine. No sustained tachyarrhythmias were seen during the thyroxine infusion.In 9 of 10 patients who underwent left ventricular assist device placement and/orheart transplantation, the use of thyroxine served as an effective adjunctivemeasure to allow transitioning to definitive surgical therapy. The 6-month and1-year cohort survival rates, achieved by the transition to surgical therapy,were 90% and 80%, respectively.CONCLUSION: The beneficial hemodynamic properties of intravenous thyroid hormone can be effectively used in otherwise terminal situations of cardiogenic shock,and in such situations, the use of thyroid hormone can serve as a pharmacologicaladjunct to a definite surgical intervention. Further studies in larger numbers ofpatients might be warranted to confirm these findings.