: 11383856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1742. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001 May;71(5):1448-53.Surgical management of valvular disease in patients requiring left ventricularassist device support.Rao V(1), Slater JP, Edwards NM, Naka Y, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, New York Presbyterian Hospital, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York 10032, USA.BACKGROUND: Success with long-term implantable left ventricular assist devices(LVAD) has led to increased use in patients previously thought to be unsuitablefor mechanical circulatory assistance. Patients with preexisting or newlydiagnosed valvular disease have been traditionally excluded from deviceplacement. The purpose of this study was to review our experience with LVADsupport in patients with valvular disease and to develop a management algorithmfor these difficult patients.METHODS: We reviewed the clinical records of 199 consecutive patients whoreceived the ThermoCardiosystems, Inc, HeartMate Pneumatic or Vented ElectricLVAD. There were 18 patients (9%) who required surgical management of native orprosthetic valvular disease during LVAD implantation.RESULTS: Suture or patch closure of the aortic valve was performed in 6 patients,aortic valve plication and repair in 1 patient, mitral valve repair in 4patients, and tricuspid valve annuloplasty in 5 patients. Two patients withmechanical mitral valve prostheses were treated with postoperative warfarinanticoagulation. Fifteen of the 18 patients with valvular pathology survived the immediate postoperative period (17% mortality). Eleven patients have eitherundergone transplantation or continue to be supported with an LVAD (61%).Operative mortality in LVAD patients without concomitant valve repair was 18% (n = 33) with a late mortality of 7% (n = 13). Seven of these late deaths occurredin patients who received a device as destination therapy. In the remaining 6patients, the cause of death was sepsis (n = 2), multisystem organ failure (n =2), driveline rupture (n = 1), and massive gastrointestinal bleed (n = 1).CONCLUSIONS: Preexisting native or prosthetic valve pathology does not increasethe immediate perioperative risk of LVAD insertion; however, these patientscontinue to pose a challenge for postoperative management while awaitingtransplantation.