: 14598097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1585. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2003 Nov;22(11):1254-67.Change in quality of life from after left ventricular assist device implantation to after heart transplantation.Grady KL(1), Meyer PM, Dressler D, White-Williams C, Kaan A, Mattea A, Ormaza S, Chillcott S, Loo A, Todd B, Costanzo MR, Piccione W.Author information: (1)Section of Cardiology, Rush Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplant Program,Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612-3824, USA.BACKGROUND: No studies have analyzed quality of life (QOL) from before to afterheart transplantation in patients with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD).Therefore, the purpose of this longitudinal, multi-site study was to compare QOL outcomes of patients listed for heart transplantation who required a leftventricular assist device (LVAD) at 3 months after implantation of an LVAD vs 3months after heart transplantation.METHODS: A non-random sample of 40 patients (predominantly middle-aged, married, white men), who had paired data at both 3 months after LVAD implantation and 3months after heart transplantation, were investigated. Patients completedself-report questionnaires (with acceptable reliability and validity) at bothtime periods, including the Quality of Life Index, Rating Question Form, HeartFailure Symptom Checklist, Sickness Impact Profile, LVAD Stressor Scale(completed only after LVAD implant), Heart Transplant Stressor Scale (completedonly after heart transplant) and Jalowiec Coping Scale. Descriptive analyses and comparative analyses using paired t-tests were performed with statisticalsignificance set at 0.01.RESULTS: Patients were significantly more satisfied with their lives overall and with their health and functioning at 3 months after heart transplantation ascompared with 3 months after LVAD implantation. Mobility, self-care ability,physical ability and overall functional ability improved from 3 months after LVADimplant to 3 months after heart transplant. There was significantly less symptom distress after LVAD implant as compared with after heart transplant for theneurologic, dermatologic and physical sub-scales. Work/school/financial stresswas significantly lower after heart transplant vs after LVAD implant. Incontrast, 2 other areas of stress were significantly lower after LVAD implant vs after heart transplant: self-care stress and hospital/clinic-related stress.CONCLUSIONS: Differences were found in QOL outcomes at 3 months after LVADimplant as compared with 3 months after heart transplant. Our findings point out specific areas of concern with respect to QOL after LVAD implant andpost-transplant, some of which are amenable to health-care providerinterventions.