: 23276817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]514. Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;7:5969-94. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S37575. Epub 2012 Dec 13.Minimally invasive cell-seeded biomaterial systems for injectable/epicardialimplantation in ischemic heart disease.Ravichandran R(1), Venugopal JR, Sundarrajan S, Mukherjee S, Ramakrishna S.Author information: (1)Healthcare and Energy Materials Laboratory, National University of Singapore, Singapore.Myocardial infarction (MI) is characterized by heart-wall thinning, myocyteslippage, and ventricular dilation. The injury to the heart-wall muscle after MI is permanent, as after an abundant cell loss the myocardial tissue lacks theintrinsic capability to regenerate. New therapeutics are required for functional improvement and regeneration of the infarcted myocardium, to overcome harmfuldiagnosis of patients with heart failure, and to overcome the shortage of heartdonors. In the past few years, myocardial tissue engineering has emerged as a newand ambitious approach for treating MI. Several left ventricular assist devicesand epicardial patches have been developed for MI. These devices andacellular/cellular cardiac patches are employed surgically and sutured to theepicardial surface of the heart, limiting the region of therapeutic benefit. Aninjectable system offers the potential benefit of minimally invasive release intothe myocardium either to restore the injured extracellular matrix or to act as a scaffold for cell delivery. Furthermore, intramyocardial injection ofbiomaterials and cells has opened new opportunities to explore and also toaugment the potentials of this technique to ease morbidity and mortality ratesowing to heart failure. This review summarizes the growing body of literature in the field of myocardial tissue engineering, where biomaterial injection, with or without simultaneous cellular delivery, has been pursued to enhance functionaland structural outcomes following MI. Additionally, this review also provides acomplete outlook on the tissue-engineering therapies presently being used formyocardial regeneration, as well as some perceptivity into the possible issuesthat may hinder its progress in the future.PMCID: PMC3526148