: 15037280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1558. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004 Apr;25(4):605-9.Mechanical versus medical bridge to transplantation in children. What is the besttiming for mechanical bridge?Reddy SL(1), Hasan A, Hamilton LR, Dark J, Schueler SW, Bolton DT, Haynes SR,Smith JH.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne NE7 7DN, UK. reddylcs@aol.comOBJECTIVE: Precise timing of mechanical circulatory support as a bridge totransplantation is crucial for successful outcome. In our practice, increasingmetabolic injury resulting from third organ (renal/gut) dysfunction is anindication for mechanical circulatory support. It is not known how metabolicinjury would influence the outcomes in these patients. In this study we compared biochemical and clinical parameters between children who received mechanicalcirculatory support and those who were treated with medical management alone as abridge to transplantation.METHODS: Data from 24 patients were retrospectively analysed from their records. There were 11 patients in the mechanical group. In this group, five patientsreceived biventricular assist device, five received veno arterial extra corporealmembrane oxygenation and one received left ventricular assist device. In themedical group, there were 13 patients who received various levels of inotropicsupport before transplantation. Five clinical and three biochemical parameterswere identified and compared between the mechanical and medical groups. Mortalityprior to transplantation was also compared between the two groups.Transplantation was the end point of the study.RESULTS: Serum creatinine and serum lactate levels were significantly higher inthe mechanical group (P=0.006 and 0.001, respectively), reflecting advancedmetabolic injury in these patients. Mean fractional shortening in the mechanical group was 8.4%, compared to 14.5% in the medical group which was statisticallysignificant (P=0.02). All of the 11 patients in the mechanical group wereventilated compared to 7 of the 13 (53.8%) in the medical group. Need for renalsupport was higher in the mechanical group (83.3%) in comparison to none in themedical group (P=0.023). Mortality in both groups was comparable with twopatients in each group. 11 patients in the medical group (84.6%) and 9 in themechanical group (81.8%) reached transplantation.CONCLUSION: This study confirmed that patients in the mechanical group wereconsiderably worse in metabolic terms when compared to the medical group. Finaloutcome of bridging them to transplantation was comparable. This study seem tosupport the justification of reserving the mechanical circulatory support tothose who are metabolically more injured without adversely affecting theiroutcomes.