: 15497396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1513. ASAIO J. 2004 Sep-Oct;50(5):512-8.Left ventricular and myocardial perfusion responses to volume unloading andafterload reduction in a computer simulation.Giridharan GA(1), Ewert DL, Pantalos GM, Gillars KJ, Litwak KN, Gray LA, KoenigSC.Author information: (1)From the Jewish Hospital Heart and Lung Institute, University of Louisville,Department of Surgery, Kentucky 40202, USA.Comment in    ASAIO J. 2005 Jan-Feb;51(1):125.Ventricular assist devices (VADs) have been used successfully as a bridge totransplant in heart failure patients by unloading ventricular volume andrestoring the circulation. In a few cases, patients have been successfully weanedfrom these devices after myocardial recovery. To promote myocardial recovery and alleviate the demand for donor organs, we are developing an artificialvasculature device (AVD) that is designed to allow the heart to fill to itsnormal volume but eject against a lower afterload. Using this approach, the heartejects its stroke volume (SV) into an AVD anastomosed to the aortic arch, whichhas been programmed to produce any desired afterload condition defined by aninput impedance profile. During diastole, the AVD returns this SV to the aorta,providing counterpulsation. Dynamic computer models of each of the assist devices(AVD, continuous, and pulsatile flow pumps) were developed and coupled to a modelof the cardiovascular system. Computer simulations of these assist techniqueswere conducted to predict physiologic responses. Hemodynamic parameters,ventricular pressure-volume loops, and vascular impedance characteristics werecalculated with AVD, continuous VAD, and asynchronous pulsatile VAD support for arange of clinical cardiac conditions (normal, failing, and recovering leftventricle). These simulation results indicate that the AVD may provide bettercoronary perfusion, as well as lower vascular resistance and elastance seen bythe native heart during ejection compared with continuous and pulsatile VAD. Our working hypothesis is that by controlling afterload using the AVD approach,ventricular cannulation can be eliminated, myocardial perfusion improved,myocardial compliance and resistance restored, and effective weaning protocolsdeveloped that promote myocardial recovery.