: 11092662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1778. Circulation. 2000 Nov 7;102(19 Suppl 3):III188-93.Deloading of the left ventricle by ventricular assist device normalizes increasedexpression of endothelin ET(A) receptors but not endothelin-converting enzyme-1in patients with end-stage heart failure.Morawietz H(1), Szibor M, Goettsch W, Bartling B, Barton M, Shaw S, Koerfer R,Zerkowski HR, Holtz J.Author information: (1)Institute of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, Martin Luther UniversityHalle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany. henning.morawietz@medizin.uni-halle.deBACKGROUND: Ventricular assist devices (VAD) are implanted in patients withend-stage heart failure for bridging the time until heart transplantation,resulting in hemodynamic unloading of the failing heart, improved cardiaccontractile and mitochondrial function, and reversal of cardiac hypertrophy. Itis unknown whether VAD unloading may affect the cardiac endothelin (ET) system,which has been proposed as one of the putative pathomechanisms of heart failure.METHODS AND RESULTS: With the use of standard-calibrated, competitivereverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction mRNA expression of components of the ET system was analyzed in left ventricular myocardium from nonfailing donorhearts, from failing hearts without and with ACE inhibitor therapy, and frompatients with end-stage heart failure at the time of VAD implantation and103+/-15 days after VAD implantation during removal with subsequent hearttransplantation. ET receptor A (ET(A)) was markedly upregulated in failing human myocardium. This increased ET(A) expression was not affected by ACE inhibitortreatment but was normalized by VAD unloading. ET(A) expression before or afterVAD implantation did not correlate with duration of VAD implantation orsuppression of Pro-ANP mRNA. ET(B) mRNA expression was unaffected by heartfailure or VAD. In contrast, increased ET-converting enzyme-1 mRNA and ET-1peptide levels in failing myocardium were partially normalized by ACE inhibition but not by VAD unloading.CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that VAD implantation normalizes ET(A) expression infailing human left ventricular myocardium, probably as the result of thebeneficial effects of VAD unloading.