: 24825877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]184. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014 May;7(3):374-80. doi:10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.113.000729. Epub 2014 May 13.Decision making for destination therapy left ventricular assist devices: "therewas no choice" versus "I thought about it an awful lot".McIlvennan CK(1), Allen LA(2), Nowels C(2), Brieke A(2), Cleveland JC(2), MatlockDD(2).Author information: (1)From the Section of Advanced Heart Failure and Transplantation, Division ofCardiology (C.K.M., L.A.A., A.B.), Division of General Internal Medicine (C.N.,D.D.M.), and Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery (J.C.C.), University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora; and Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes ResearchConsortium, Denver (C.K.M., L.A.A., D.D.M.). colleen.mcilvennan@ucdenver.edu.(2)From the Section of Advanced Heart Failure and Transplantation, Division ofCardiology (C.K.M., L.A.A., A.B.), Division of General Internal Medicine (C.N.,D.D.M.), and Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery (J.C.C.), University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora; and Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes ResearchConsortium, Denver (C.K.M., L.A.A., D.D.M.).BACKGROUND: Destination therapy left ventricular assist devices (DT LVADs) areone of the most invasive medical interventions for end-stage illness. Howpatients decide whether or not to proceed with device implantation is unknown. Weaimed to understand the decision-making processes of patients who either acceptor decline DT LVADs.METHODS AND RESULTS: Between October 2012 and September 2013, we conductedsemistructured, in-depth interviews to understand patients' decision-makingexperiences. Data were analyzed using a mixed inductive and deductive approach.Twenty-two eligible patients were interviewed, 15 with DT LVADs and 7 whodeclined. We found a strong dichotomy between decision processes with somepatients (11 accepters) being automatic and others (3 accepters, 7 decliners)being reflective in their approach to decision making. The automatic group wascharacterized by a fear of dying and an over-riding desire to live as long aspossible: "[LVAD] was the only option I had…that or push up daisies…so Iautomatically took this." By contrast, the reflective group went through areasoned process of weighing risks, benefits, and burdens: "There are worsethings than death." Irrespective of approach, most patients experienced the DTLVAD decision as a highly emotional process and many sought support from theirfamilies or spiritually.CONCLUSIONS: Some patients offered a DT LVAD face the decision by reflecting on aprocess and reasoning through risks and benefits. For others, the desire to live supersedes such reflective processing. Acknowledging this difference is importantwhen considering how to support patients who are faced with this complexdecision.© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.PMCID: PMC4081474