: 25452914  [PubMed]75. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2014 Sep;3(5):513-24. doi:10.3978/j.issn.2225-319X.2014.08.20.Mechanical circulatory support devices as destination therapy-current evidence.Puehler T(1), Ensminger S(1), Schoenbrodt M(1), Börgermann J(1), Rehn E(1),Hakim-Meibodi K(1), Morshuis M(1), Gummert J(1).Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Diabetes CenterBad Oeynhausen, University Hospital of the Rhine University Bochum, BadOeynhausen, Germany.Advanced heart failure is an increasing problem worldwide. Nowadays, mechanicalcirculatory support devices (MSCD) are an established therapeutic option forterminal heart failure after exhaustion of medical and conventional surgicaltreatment, and are becoming a realistic alternative to heart transplantation(HTX). There are a number of different treatment options for these patients, suchas bridge to transplantation (BTT), bridge to candidacy (BTC), bridge to recovery(BTR) and the destination therapy (DT) option. The latter option has become more frequent throughout the last years, due to a donor organ shortage and anincreasing number of older patients with terminal heart failure who are noteligible for HTX. These factors have led to a rapidly increasing number of LVADimplantations as well as centers which perform these procedures. This has alsobeen due to improved LVAD survival rates and quality of life following theintroduction of smaller, intrapericardial and more durable continuous flow leftventricular devices. The most common complications for these patients aredevice-related problems, such as coagulation disorders, gastrointestinalbleeding, device related infection, pump thrombosis or cerebrovascular accidents.However, some questions still remain unanswered or under debate, such as theexact time-point for LVAD implantation. In addition, aspects such as betterbiocompatibility for LVADs remain a major challenge. This review will concentrateon DT for terminal heart failure and provide an overview of the current evidence for LVAD implantation in this patient group, with particular emphasis onindication and time-point of implantation, choice of LVADs, and long termoutcomes and quality of life.PMCID: PMC4229463