: 20184109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]989. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Apr;29(4 Suppl):S1-39. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2010.01.011. Epub 2010 Feb 24.Clinical management of continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices inadvanced heart failure.Slaughter MS(1), Pagani FD, Rogers JG, Miller LW, Sun B, Russell SD, Starling RC,Chen L, Boyle AJ, Chillcott S, Adamson RM, Blood MS, Camacho MT, Idrissi KA,Petty M, Sobieski M, Wright S, Myers TJ, Farrar DJ; HeartMate II ClinicalInvestigators.Author information: (1)University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.Comment in    J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Sep;29(9):1081.Continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) have emerged as thestandard of care for advanced heart failure patients requiring long-termmechanical circulatory support. Evidence-based clinical management ofLVAD-supported patients is becoming increasingly important for optimizingoutcomes. In this state-of-art review, we propose key elements in managingpatients supported with the new continuous-flow LVADs. Although most of thepresented information is largely based on investigator experience during the1,300-patient HeartMate II clinical trial, many of the discussed principles canbe applied to other emerging devices as well. Patient selection, pre-operativepreparation, and the timing of LVAD implant are some of the most importantelements critical to successful circulatory support and are principles universal to all devices. In addition, proper nutrition management and avoidance ofinfectious complications can significantly affect morbidity and mortality during LVAD support. Optimizing intraoperative and peri-operative care, and themonitoring and treatment of other organ system dysfunction as it relates to LVAD support, are discussed. A multidisciplinary heart failure team must be organized and charged with providing comprehensive care from initial referral until supportis terminated. Preparing for hospital discharge requires detailed education forthe patient and family or friends, with provisions for emergencies and routinecare. Implantation techniques, troubleshooting device problems, and algorithmsfor outpatient management, including the diagnosis and treatment of relatedproblems associated with the HeartMate II, are discussed as an example of aspecific continuous-flow LVAD. Ongoing trials with other continuous-flow devices may produce additional information in the future for improving clinicalmanagement of patients with these devices.Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.