: 12704488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1636. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003 Apr;75(4):1200-4.Successful experience in bridging patients to heart transplantation with theMicroMed DeBakey ventricular assist device.Vitali E(1), Lanfranconi M, Ribera E, Bruschi G, Colombo T, Frigerio M, Russo C.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery A. De Gasperis, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital,Milan, Italy. evitali@ospedale-niguarda.itBACKGROUND: Pulsatile left ventricular assist devices are used with increasingfrequency to bridge patients with end-stage heart failure to hearttransplantation (HTx). Implantation of pulsatile devices is a cumbersome surgicalprocedure that is associated with major complications, such as bleeding,thromboembolism, and infection. Recently, a continuous axial flow leftventricular assist device (DeBakey ventricular assist device) has been introducedwith the goal of reducing the incidence of major complications.METHODS: We reviewed our experience with 11 patients who received a DeBakeyventricular assist device axial flow pump for bridge to HTx from April 2000through November 2001.RESULTS: Two patients (18.2%) died of multiple-organ failure while on leftventricular assist device support. Bleeding requiring thoracotomy occurred in 2patients (18.2%). One patient had a minor neurologic event, and one patientdeveloped left ventricular assist device thrombosis, which was successfullytreated without pump exchange. Renal failure developed in 1 patient and hepaticdysfunction in 2 patients. There were no instances of right heart failure. Nodevice, pocket, or drive-line infections occurred. Nine patients (9 of 11, 81.8%)had HTx within 51 +/- 49 days (range, 11 to 141 days) after left ventricularassist device implant. One patient died 29 days after HTx because of acuterejection.CONCLUSIONS: The continuous axial flow DeBakey ventricular assist device hadreliable features, including a high rate of bridge to HTx. This device had lowcomplication and system failure rates. We consider the DeBakey ventricular assistdevice a favorable alternative to pulsatile heart assist devices as a bridge toHTx.