: 20559133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]947. ASAIO J. 2010 Jul-Aug;56(4):356-63. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e3181e3cb22.A parametric study of valve orientation on the flow patterns of the Penn Statepulsatile pediatric ventricular assist device.Roszelle BN(1), Deutsch S, Manning KB.Author information: (1)Department of Bioengineering, The Pennsylvania State University, UniversityPark, Pennsylvania, USA.Because of the shortage of organs for transplant in pediatric patients withend-stage heart failure, Penn State is developing a pneumatically driven 12 ccpulsatile pediatric ventricular assist device (PVAD). A major concern is the flowfield changes related to the volume decrease and its effect on devicethrombogenicity. Previous studies of similar devices have shown that changes inthe orientation of the inlet valve can lead to improvement in the flow field.Herein, the fluid dynamic effects of orientation changes at both the inlet andoutlet valves are studied. Using two-dimensional particle image velocimetry, weexamine the flow field in vitro using an acrylic model of the PVAD in a mockcirculatory loop. Regardless of valve orientation, the overall flow patterninside the PVAD remains similar, but important differences were seen locally inthe wall shear rates, which is notable because shear rates >500 s may preventthrombus formation. As the inlet valve was rotated toward the fluid side of thePVAD, we observed an increase in inlet jet velocity and wall shear rates alongthe inlet port wall. A corresponding rotation of the outlet valve increases thewall shear rate along the outer wall near the device outlet. Wall shear rateswere all higher when both valves were rotated toward the fluid side of thedevice, with the best rates found at orientations of +15 degrees for both theinlet and outlet valves. Overall, orientations of +15 degrees or +30 degrees ofboth the inlet and outlet valve resulted in an increase in wall shear rates andcould aid in the reduction of thrombus formation inside the PVAD.