: 21215378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]866. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011 May;30(5):497-506. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2010.11.011. Epub 2011 Jan 6.Proteomic profiling of the human failing heart after left ventricular assistdevice support.de Weger RA(1), Schipper ME, Siera-de Koning E, van der Weide P, van OosterhoutMF, Quadir R, Steenbergen-Nakken H, Lahpor JR, de Jonge N, Bovenschen N.Author information: (1)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, TheNetherlands.Comment in    J Heart Lung Transplant. 2011 May;30(5):494-6.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support is commonly used inpatients with heart failure as a bridge to heart transplantation. Whereasmyocardial gene expression profile changes have been well established after LVAD support, the consequences on the protein level largely remain unclear.METHODS: Pre-LVAD and post-LVAD myocardial tissue specimens from dilatedcardiomyopathy (DCM) and ischemic heart disease (IHD) patients were analyzed byfluorescent 2-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis, and differentiallyexpressed proteins were identified by mass spectrometry.RESULTS: In the DCM group, 16 proteins were detected that showed statisticallysignificant downregulation from pre-LVAD to post-LVAD tissue. In IHD patients, 50alterations were found, including upregulated (n = 12) and downregulated (n = 38)proteins. The identified proteins in both groups partially overlapped andincluded proteins from cytoskeleton and mitochondrial energy metabolism. Thelatter changes were paralleled by severe abnormalities in mitochondrialmorphology, as shown by electron microscopy. Post-LVAD proteomes of both DCM and IHD patients largely mimicked the protein profiles of non-failing hearts.Downregulation of the serine protease inhibitor α-1-antichymotrypsin in both DCM and IHD patients after LVAD support was confirmed by immunosorbent assay.CONCLUSIONS: LVAD-induced cardiac remodeling in DCM and IHD patients isassociated with downregulation of α-1-antichymotrypsin and specific atrophicchanges in protein expression profiles predominantly involved in cytoskeletonintegrity and mitochondrial energy metabolism.Copyright © 2011 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.