: 9754587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1881. Int J Artif Organs. 1998 Jul;21(7):414-6.Mechanical circulatory support after orthotopic heart transplantation.Tenderich G(1), Koerner MM, Stuettgen B, Minami K, El-Banayosy A, Arusoglu L,Mirow N, Wlost S, Gromzik H, Kleesiek K, Meyer H, Koerfer R.Author information: (1)Heart Center North Rhine-Westphalia, Ruhr-University of Bochum, BadOeynhausen, Germany.Frequently the only therapy for primary graft- and right heart failure, as wellas low output syndrome from acute of chronic rejection, is implantation of amechanical circulatory support system, until recompensation or retransplantation.At our institution, mechanical assist devices were implanted in 25 heartrecipients for a cute rejection (n=9), primary graft failure (n=7), acute rightheart failure (n=7), and chronic rejection with low output syndrome (n=2).Patients (pts) with primary graft failure (n=3) received an intraaortic balloonpump (IABP), one pt an IABP plus Abiomed-System for left ventricular support, onept the Thoratec-System for biventricular support. Patients with right heartfailure (RHF) received the Biomedicus centrifugal pump for right ventricularsupport. Nine pts suffered from acute rejection. Six pts received an IABP, onethe Biomedicus as femoro-femoral bypass, one the Abiomed-System for biventricularsupport, two the Thoratec-System for biventricular support and two within thisgroup switched from the Biomedicus pump to the Thoratec-System for biventricular support. Patients with chronic graft failure (n=2) received the Novacor-System(LVAD) for left ventricular support, one received a Tojobo-System and anoxygenator for biventricular support post coronary artery bypass surgery. Supporttime ranged from 0.5-h to 73 days. Five pts were weaned. Two (8%) of 25 pts were retransplanted, 18 (72%) died in spite of mechanical support from multiple organ failure. The use of a mechanical assist device after heart transplantation isencouraging only in the case of early right heart failure, as well as primary andchronic graft failure. In view of the poor results, the use of mechanical assist devices should not be recommended in the case of heart failure caused by acuterejection.