: 19833355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1034. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Jan;29(1):53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2009.08.016.Epub 2009 Oct 9.Cardiac transplantation and/or mechanical circulatory support device placementusing heparin anti-coagulation in the presence of acute heparin-inducedthrombocytopenia.Zucker MJ(1), Sabnani I, Baran DA, Balasubramanian S, Camacho M.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Newark Beth Israel Medical Center, Newark, New Jersey 07112, USA. mzucker@sbhcs.comBACKGROUND: Patients with congestive heart failure, decreased left ventricularfunction, and debilitation are frequently maintained on anti-coagulants,including heparin. As such, these patients are at high risk for developingheparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). Some of these HIT-positive individualswill ultimately undergo urgent heart transplantation or placement of a mechanicalcirculatory support device (MCSD). Such procedures require cardiopulmonary bypass(CPB) and full anti-coagulation. The safety of re-exposure to heparin during CPB despite the presence of recent-onset thrombocytopenia and Hep/PF4 antibodies has not been studied in the transplant or MCSD populations.METHODS: Over a 24-month period, 75 heart transplants and 55 MCSD implants wereperformed. Fourteen patients with acute HIT (thrombocytopenia and positiveHep/PF4 antibody by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) and 3 patientswith a history of remote HIT underwent cardiac transplantation (n = 9) and/orMCSD placement (n = 8) using heparin as the anti-coagulant during CPB. The mediantime from diagnosis to CPB was 4.5 days in patients with acute HIT.RESULTS: Thirty-day survival was 100% in transplant patients and 75% in MCSDpatients. Post-transplant ELISA testing was found to be negative in 4 patientswith acute HIT and 3 with remote HIT.CONCLUSIONS: This series demonstrates that short-term re-exposure to heparinduring urgent CPB for heart transplantation or MCSD placement is safe despite thepresence of thrombocytopenia and Hep/PF4 antibodies. Moreover, the rapidclearance of Hep/PF4 antibodies in our transplant patients suggests a potentialtherapeutic role for immunosuppressive therapy in the management of HIT in theacute setting.Copyright (c) 2010 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.