: 11551874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1728. Circulation. 2001 Sep 4;104(10):1147-52.Downregulation of matrix metalloproteinases and reduction in collagen damage inthe failing human heart after support with left ventricular assist devices.Li YY(1), Feng Y, McTiernan CF, Pei W, Moravec CS, Wang P, Rosenblum W, KormosRL, Feldman AM.Author information: (1)Cardiovascular Institute, Department of Neurology, University of PittsburghSchool of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.Comment in    Circulation. 2001 Sep 4;104(10):1089-91.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support of the failing heartinduces salutary changes in myocardial structure and function. Matrixmetalloproteinases (MMPs) are increased in the failing heart and are induced bystretch in cardiac cells in vitro. We hypothesized that mechanical unloading may affect LV plasticity by regulating MMPs and their substrates.METHODS AND RESULTS: LV samples were collected from patients with dilatedcardiomyopathy (DCM, n=14) or ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM, n=16) at the time of implantation of the LVAD and again during cardiac transplantation. MMP-1, -3, and-9 were measured by ELISA, MMP-2 and -9 gelatinolytic activity by gelatinzymography, and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) by Western blot. Total soluble and insoluble collagens were separated by pepsin solubilization,and the contents were determined by quantification of hydroxyproline. Theundenatured soluble collagen was measured by Sircol collagen assay. The resultsshowed that MMP-1 and -9 were decreased, whereas TIMP-1 and -3 were increased,but there was no change in MMP-2 and -3 and TIMP-2 and -4 after LVAD support. Theundenatured collagen was increased, with the ratio of undenatured to totalsoluble collagens increased in ICM and that of insoluble to total solublecollagens increased in DCM after LVAD support.CONCLUSIONS: The reduced MMPs and increased TIMPs and ratios of undenatured tototal soluble collagens and insoluble to total soluble collagens after LVADsupport suggest that reduced MMP activity diminished damage to the matrix. These changes may contribute to the functional recovery and LV plasticity after LVADsupport.