: 11833699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1710. J Card Surg. 2001 May-Jun;16(3):203-8.Developing a comprehensive mechanical support program.Helman DN(1), Oz MC.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center,College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New York10032, USA.As cardiac surgery centers appreciate that ventricular assist devices (VAD) candramatically impact patient survival as a bridge to transplant or recovery, andpossibly permanent therapy, increasing numbers will desire to establishmechanical support programs. A number of vital elements must be put in place inorder to operate a successful mechanical support program. Of utmost importance isthe assembly of a dedicated team focused on comprehensive care of critically ill patients in need of circulatory support. An ongoing commitment fromanesthesiologists, cardiologists, nephrologists, and other support staff isessential. Selection of complementary assist devices should be made to cover the spectrum of required support scenarios, both short- and long-term. Outpatienttherapy has become increasingly important in mechanical cardiac assistance andestablishment of an office where "LVAD coordinators" see outpatients facilitates this aspect of the program. Critically ill patients in need of cardiac assistancemay benefit from specialized medical therapies such as: (1) intravenous arginine vasopressin for vasodilatory hypotension; (2) inhaled nitric oxide for rightheart failure; (3) aprotinin to reduce hemorrhage; and (4) early enteral feeding in an effort to reduce infectious complications and improve rehabilitationfollowing VAD implantation. A regional network with spoke hospitals centeredaround a hub hospital with long-term VAD and heart transplant programs canimprove survival of patients with postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock via earlytransfer to the hub hospital. In this article, we describe the components of our mechanical support program that have allowed us to successfully support patients with heart failure in need of circulatory support.