: 25298334  [PubMed - in process]102. Circ Heart Fail. 2014 Nov;7(6):1003-13. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.114.001391.Epub 2014 Oct 7.Clinical outcomes after continuous-flow left ventricular assist device: asystematic review.McIlvennan CK(1), Magid KH(2), Ambardekar AV(2), Thompson JS(2), Matlock DD(2),Allen LA(2).Author information: (1)From the Division of Cardiology (C.K.M., A.V.A., L.A.A.), Adult and ChildCenter for Health Outcomes Research and Delivery Science (K.H.M., J.S.T.), andDivision of General Internal Medicine (D.D.M.), University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora; Brown University, School of Public Health, Providence, RI(K.H.M.); and Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes Research Consortium, Denver(C.K.M., D.D.M., L.A.A.). colleen.mcilvennan@ucdenver.edu. (2)From the Divisionof Cardiology (C.K.M., A.V.A., L.A.A.), Adult and Child Center for HealthOutcomes Research and Delivery Science (K.H.M., J.S.T.), and Division of General Internal Medicine (D.D.M.), University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora;Brown University, School of Public Health, Providence, RI (K.H.M.); and Colorado Cardiovascular Outcomes Research Consortium, Denver (C.K.M., D.D.M., L.A.A.).BACKGROUND: Conveying the complex trade-offs of continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices is challenging and made more difficult by absence of an evidencesummary for the full range of possible outcomes. We aimed to summarize thecurrent evidence on outcomes of continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices.METHODS AND RESULTS: PubMed and Cochrane Library were searched from January 2007 to December 2013, supplemented with manual review. Three reviewers independently assessed each study for saliency on patient-centered outcomes. Data weresummarized in tabular form. Overall study characteristics encouraged inclusion ofall indications (destination therapy and bridge to transplant) and preventedmeta-analysis. The electronic search identified 465 abstracts, of which 50 metinclusion criteria; manual review added 2 articles in press. The articlesincluded 10 industry-funded trials and registries, 10 multicenter reports, andthe remainder single-center observational experiences. Estimated actuarialsurvival after continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices ranged from 56% to87% at 1 year, 43% to 84% at 2 years, and 47% at 4 years. Improvements infunctional class and quality of life were reported, but missing data complicated interpretation. Adverse events were experienced by the majority of patients, but estimates for bleeding, stroke, infection, right heart failure, arrhythmias, and rehospitalizations varied greatly.CONCLUSIONS: The totality of data for continuous-flow left ventricular assistdevices show consistent improvements in survival and quality of lifecounterbalanced by a range of common complications. Although this summary should provide a practical resource for healthcare provider-led discussions withpatients, it highlights the critical need for high-quality patient-centered data collected with standard definitions.© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.PMCID: PMC4241134 [Available on 2015-11-01]