: 12909322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1607. Circulation. 2003 Jul 29;108(4):407-13. Epub 2003 Jul 21.Inhibitory cardiac transcription factor, SRF-N, is generated by caspase 3cleavage in human heart failure and attenuated by ventricular unloading.Chang J(1), Wei L, Otani T, Youker KA, Entman ML, Schwartz RJ.Author information: (1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Center for CardiovascularDevelopment, Methodist Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,Houston, Tex 77030, USA.BACKGROUND: Knowledge about molecular mechanisms leading to heart failure isstill limited, but reduced gene activities and modest activation of caspase 3 arehallmarks of end-stage heart failure. We postulated that serum response factor(SRF), a central cardiac transcription factor, might be a cleavage target formodest activated caspase 3, and this cleavage of SRF may play a dominantinhibitory role in propelling hearts toward failure.METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined SRF protein levels from cardiac samples taken atthe time of transplantation in 13 patients with end-stage heart failure and 7normal hearts. Full-length SRF was markedly reduced and processed into 55- and32-kDa subfragments in all failing hearts. SRF was intact in normal samples. Incontrast, the hearts of 10 patients with left ventricular assist devices showedminimal SRF fragmentation. Specific antibodies to N- and C-terminal SRF sequencesand site-directed mutagenesis revealed 2 alternative caspase 3 cleavage sites, sothat 2 fragments were detected of each containing either the N- or C-terminalSRF. Expression of SRF-N, the 32-kDa fragment, in myogenic cells inhibited thetranscriptional activity of alpha-actin gene promoters by 50% to 60%, whichsuggests that truncated SRF functioned as a dominant-negative transcriptionfactor.CONCLUSIONS: Caspase 3 activation in heart failure sequentially cleaved SRF andgenerated a dominant-negative transcription factor, which may explain thedepression of cardiac-specific genes. Moreover, caspase 3 activation may bereversible in the failing heart with ventricular unloading.