: 19779301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1046. Ann Thorac Surg. 2009 Oct;88(4):1171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2009.06.095.Activation of endothelial and coagulation systems in left ventricular assistdevice recipients.John R(1), Panch S, Hrabe J, Wei P, Solovey A, Joyce L, Hebbel R.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University ofMinnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. johnx008@umn.eduBACKGROUND: The paucity of organ donors has necessitated redirecting researchtoward finding alternative means to a heart transplant, such as left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) that will serve not merely as bridge-to-transplant butalso as destination therapy. To better understand hemorrhagic and thromboembolic complications that currently limit the use of such devices, we studied theendothelial and coagulation system changes in LVAD recipients with time.METHODS: We studied these markers of endothelial dysfunction: circulatingendothelial cells and expression of E-selectin, vascular cell adhesion molecule, intercellular adhesion molecule, and tissue factor on circulating endothelialcells, thrombin generation (prothrombin fragments 1,2 and thrombin/antithrombin),and fibrinolysis (D-dimer). Our study group consisted of 21 LVAD recipients (onday 0 and on postoperative days 1, 7, 30, 90, and 180) and 7 control patientsundergoing non-LVAD cardiac surgery.RESULTS: Baseline values of intercellular adhesion molecule, E-selectin, tissuefactor, thrombin/antithrombin, and D-dimer were significantly higher in LVADrecipients than the normal range. Markers of thrombin generation(thrombin/antithrombin and prothrombin fragments 1,2) and fibrinolysis (D-dimer) peaked postoperatively and declined to baseline levels or below by 3 months. But the expression of inducible endothelial markers (intercellular adhesion molecule,E-selectin, tissue factor) on circulating endothelial cells increasedpostoperatively, then decreased but remained elevated above preoperative levelsfor up to 6 months. In our control patients, baseline levels of intercellularadhesion molecule, E-selectin, tissue factor, D-dimer, and thrombin/antithrombin were lower and decreased significantly by day 7, as compared with LVAD recipients(p < 0.05).CONCLUSIONS: Left ventricular assist device recipients experienced significantbaseline activation of endothelial and coagulation systems, further accentuatedin the early postoperative period. Left ventricular assist device recipients alsohad prolonged activation of the endothelial and coagulation systems, suggestingactivation of the extrinsic (tissue factor) pathway of thrombosis mediated bysustained endothelial dysfunction in these patients. Further studies are neededto determine the clinical influence of such changes in LVAD recipients.