: 15797736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1477. Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Apr 15;40(8):1108-15. Epub 2005 Mar 11.Left ventricular assist device-related infection: treatment and outcome.Simon D(1), Fischer S, Grossman A, Downer C, Hota B, Heroux A, Trenholme G.Author information: (1)Section of Infectious Disease, Cardiology, Rush University Medical Center,Chicago, IL, USA. David_M_Simon@rush.edu <David_M_Simon@rush.edu>BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation has become aneffective treatment option for patients with severe heart failure awaitingtransplantation. Significant infection rates have been reported among LVADrecipients. However, few reports have focused specifically on device infection,its treatment, and the impact of LVAD-related infection on clinical outcome.METHODS: Forty-six LVAD-related infections were diagnosed in 38 (50%) of 76patients who underwent LVAD implantation as a bridge to transplantation.Twenty-nine episodes of LVAD-related bloodstream infection (BSI) (including 5that were cases of LVAD endocarditis) and 17 episodes of local LVAD infectionwere identified.RESULTS: Diabetes mellitus appeared to increase the risk of BSI among patientswith LVAD infection. LVAD-related infection delayed transplantation, as reflectedby longer device-support times (a mean duration +/- SEM of 182.8+/-31.1 days,compared with 66.3+/-8.8 days; P<or=.001). Continuous antimicrobial treatmentbefore, during, and after transplantation was associated with fewer relapses thanwas a limited course of antibiotics (P<.001). A trend for longer hospital staysafter receipt of a transplant and increased early mortality was observed in thecohort with LVAD-related infection, although long-term survival was similar tothat associated with patients without LVAD-related infection. Posttransplantationinvasive vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VREF) infection was diagnosedin 6 patients with LVAD-related infection; 4 of these patients died. No VREFinfections were identified in patients without LVAD-related infection.CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest that LVAD-related infection is common andmay require antimicrobial therapy before, during, and after transplantation, but that it does not prevent successful transplantation. However, patients withLVAD-related infection appear to be at increased risk for invasive VREFinfection, which may contribute to early mortality after transplantation.