: 16684049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1392. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 May;131(5):975-80.Restoration of myocardial beta-adrenergic receptor signaling after leftventricular assist device support.Pandalai PK(1), Bulcao CF, Merrill WH, Akhter SA.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Section of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University ofCincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0558, USA.OBJECTIVE: Left ventricular assist device support for patients with chronic heartfailure can significantly improve beta-adrenergic receptor signaling, which islikely critical to myocardial recovery. The mechanism underlying the restoration of beta-adrenergic receptor signaling is unclear. This study investigates ourhypothesis that restoration of cardiac beta-adrenergic receptor signaling by leftventricular assist devices results from inhibition of the G protein-coupledreceptor kinase-2, a G protein-coupled receptor kinase that specificallyphosphorylates and desensitizes agonist-occupied beta-adrenergic receptors.METHODS: Left ventricular beta-adrenergic receptor signaling was assessed inbiopsy specimens taken from patients with chronic heart failure (n = 12) at thetime of left ventricular assist device implantation (heart failure group) andagain at the time of heart transplantation (left ventricular assist devicegroup). Signaling was also studied in left ventricular biopsy specimens fromnonfailing control (n = 8) hearts (nonfailing control group). Signaling wasassessed by measuring sarcolemmal membrane beta-adrenergic receptor density,adenylyl cyclase activity, G protein expression, and G protein-coupled receptorkinase-2 expression and activity.RESULTS: Left ventricular beta-adrenergic receptor signaling was severelydecreased in the heart failure group versus that seen in the nonfailing controlgroup, as demonstrated by adenylyl cyclase activity. G protein-coupled receptorkinase-2 expression and activity was increased 3-fold in the heart failure group versus that seen in the nonfailing control group. After left ventricular assistdevice support, beta-adrenergic receptor signaling was restored to levels similarto those seen in the nonfailing control group. G protein-coupled receptorkinase-2 expression and activity were markedly diminished after left ventricular assist device support compared with that seen in the heart failure group and werenot different from that seen in the nonfailing control group.CONCLUSION: In chronic heart failure left ventricular assist device support leadsto restoration of cardiac beta-adrenergic receptor signaling. The primarymechanism appears to be diminished myocardial G protein-coupled receptor kinase-2activity. This demonstrates the potentially beneficial effects of Gprotein-coupled receptor kinase-2 inhibition on beta-adrenergic receptorsignaling in heart failure and might represent a novel therapeutic strategy forthis disease process.