: 24413008  [PubMed - in process]282. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Mar;68:98-105. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.12.029. Epub2014 Jan 9.Freshly isolated mitochondria from failing human hearts exhibit preservedrespiratory function.Cordero-Reyes AM(1), Gupte AA(2), Youker KA(1), Loebe M(1), Hsueh WA(3),Torre-Amione G(4), Taegtmeyer H(5), Hamilton DJ(6).Author information: (1)Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College,USA. (2)Bioenergetics Program, Houston Methodist Research Institute, WeillCornell Medical College, USA. (3)Methodist Diabetes and Metabolism Institute,Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, USA; HoustonMethodist Hospital Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, USA.(4)Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College,USA; Catedra de Cardiologia y Medicina Vascular, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico. (5)The University of Texas Medical School at Houston, Department ofInternal Medicine, USA. (6)Bioenergetics Program, Houston Methodist ResearchInstitute, Weill Cornell Medical College, USA; Houston Methodist HospitalDepartment of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, USA. Electronic address:DJHamilton@houstonmethodist.org.In heart failure mitochondrial dysfunction is thought to be responsible forenergy depletion and contractile dysfunction. The difficulties in procuring freshleft ventricular (LV) myocardium from humans for assessment of mitochondrialfunction have resulted in the reliance on surrogate markers of mitochondrialfunction and limited our understanding of cardiac energetics. We isolatedmitochondria from fresh LV wall tissue of patients with heart failure and reducedsystolic function undergoing heart transplant or left ventricular assist deviceplacement, and compared their function to mitochondria isolated from thenon-failing LV (NFLV) wall tissue with normal systolic function from patientswith pulmonary hypertension undergoing heart-lung transplant. We performeddetailed mitochondrial functional analyses using 4 substrates: glutamate-malate(GM), pyruvate-malate (PM) palmitoyl carnitine-malate (PC) and succinate. NFLVmitochondria showed preserved respiratory control ratios and electron chainintegrity with only few differences for the 4 substrates. In contrast, HFmitochondria had greater respiration with GM, PM and PC substrates and higherelectron chain capacity for PM than for PC. Surprisingly, HF mitochondria hadgreater respiratory control ratios and lower ADP-independent state 4 rates thanNFLV mitochondria for GM, PM and PC substrates demonstrating that HF mitochondriaare capable of coupled respiration ex vivo. Gene expression studies revealeddecreased expression of key genes in pathways for oxidation of both fatty acidsand glucose. Our results suggest that mitochondria from the failing LV myocardiumare capable of tightly coupled respiration when isolated and supplied with ample substrates. Thus energy starvation in the failing heart may be the result ofdysregulation of metabolic pathways, impaired substrate supply or reducedmitochondrial number but not the result of reduced mitochondrial electrontransport capacity.Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC3995348