: 21336538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]843. Crit Care Med. 2011 May;39(5):1029-35. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31820ead45.Outcomes, long-term quality of life, and psychologic assessment of fulminantmyocarditis patients rescued by mechanical circulatory support.Mirabel M(1), Luyt CE, Leprince P, Trouillet JL, Léger P, Pavie A, Chastre J,Combes A.Author information: (1)Service de Réanimation Médicale, Institut de Cardiologie, HôpitalPitié-Salpêtrière, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, UniversitéPierre-et-Marie-Curie, Paris, France.Comment in    Crit Care Med. 2011 May;39(5):1211-3.OBJECTIVE: Myocarditis is a rare disease that may progress rapidly to refractory cardiogenic shock and death. In such situations, emergent initiation ofmechanical circulatory assistance is the only therapeutic option to rescue these dying patients. This study was designed to evaluate the outcomes, health-related quality of life and frequencies of anxiety, depression and posttraumatic stressdisorder symptoms in fulminant myocarditis patients rescued by mechanicalcirculatory assistance, since these major components of outcome evaluation after serious illnesses have not yet been assessed in this setting.DESIGN: A retrospective, single-center, observational study and a cross-sectionalsurvey to assess health-related quality of life by the Short Form-36questionnaire and frequencies of anxiety, depression and posttraumatic stressdisorder symptoms by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale and the Impact of Event Scale, respectively.SETTING: An 18-bed tertiary intensive care unit in a university hospital.PATIENTS: We analyzed the short- and long-term outcomes of 41 patientshospitalized at our institution between 2003 and 2009 and who received either aThoratec BiVAD (Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA) (n = 6) or extracorporeal membraneoxygenation (n = 35) to combat refractory cardiogenic shock due to fulminantmyocarditis.MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Intensive care unit survival was 68%, and four(10%) patients underwent heart transplantation. Independent predictors ofin-intensive care unit death were Simplified Acute Physiology Score II ≥56 (odds ratio = 10.23) and troponin Ic ≥12 μg/L (odds ratio = 7.49) at admission.Complete follow-up (median, 525 days) was available for 26 of 28 survivors.Compared to age- and sex-matched controls, Short Form-36 evaluation ofhealth-related quality of life revealed satisfactory mental health and vitalitybut persistent physical and psychosocial-related difficulties. Lastly, anxiety,depression, and/or posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms were reported by 38%,27% and 27% of the patients, respectively.CONCLUSIONS: Mechanical circulatory assistance rescued 68% of patients withrefractory circulatory failure due to fulminant myocarditis. Greater diseaseseverity and higher troponin Ic levels at extracorporeal membrane oxygenationinitiation predicted poorer prognosis. Because up to one-third of the patientsreported anxiety, depression, and/or posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms,strategies aimed at attenuating their emotional and psychologic distress mightsignificantly improve their long-lasting well-being.