: 24582838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]237. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Apr;33(4):372-81. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2014.01.866. Epub 2014 Jan 27.Assessment of myocardial viability and left ventricular function in patientssupported by a left ventricular assist device.Gupta DK(1), Skali H(1), Rivero J(1), Campbell P(2), Griffin L(1), Smith C(1),Foster C(3), Claggett B(1), Glynn RJ(4), Couper G(1), Givertz MM(1), Mehra MR(1),Carli MD(5), Solomon SD(1), Pfeffer MA(6).Author information: (1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Department of Cardiac Sciences,University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (3)Division of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Department of Radiology, Boston, Massachusetts.(4)Department of Biostatistics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard MedicalSchool, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Cardiovascular Division, Department ofMedicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,Massachusetts; Division of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Department of Radiology, Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Cardiovascular Division, Department ofMedicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,Massachusetts. Electronic address: mpfeffer@partners.org.BACKGROUND: Chronically supported left ventricular assist device (LVAD) patients may be candidates for novel therapies aimed at promoting reverse remodeling andmyocardial recovery. However, the effect of hemodynamic unloading with a LVAD on myocardial viability and LV function in chronically supported LVAD patients hasnot been fully characterized. We aimed to develop a non-invasive imaging protocolto serially quantify native cardiac structure, function, and myocardial viabilitywhile at reduced LVAD support.METHODS: Clinically stable (n = 18) ambulatory patients (83% men, median age, 61 years) supported by a HeartMate II (Thoratec, Pleasanton, CA) LVAD (mediandurations of heart failure 4.6 years and LVAD support 7 months) were evaluated byechocardiography and technetium-99m ((99m)Tc)-sestamibi single photon emissioncomputed tomography (SPECT) imaging at baseline and after an interval of 2 to 3months. Echocardiographic measures of LV size and function, including speckletracking-derived circumferential strain, were compared between ambulatory andreduced LVAD support at baseline and between baseline and follow-up at reducedLVAD support. The extent of myocardial viability by SPECT was compared betweenbaseline and follow-up at reduced LVAD support.RESULTS: With reduction in LVAD speeds (6,600 rpm; interquartile range: 6,200,7,400 rpm), LV size increased, LV systolic function remained stable, and filling pressures nominally worsened. After a median 2.1 months, cardiac structure,function, and the extent of viable myocardium, globally and regionally, wasunchanged on repeat imaging while at reduced LVAD speed.CONCLUSIONS: In clinically stable chronically supported LVAD patients, intrinsic cardiac structure, function, and myocardial viability did not significantlychange over the pre-specified time frame. Echocardiographic circumferentialstrain and (99m)Tc-sestamibi SPECT myocardial viability imaging may provideuseful non-invasive end points for the assessment of cardiac structure andfunction, particularly for phase II studies of novel therapies aimed at promotingreverse remodeling and myocardial recovery in LVAD patients.Copyright © 2014 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC3966997