: 21224933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]864. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2011 Feb;13(1):79-89. doi:10.1007/s11936-010-0100-y.End of life care in advanced heart failure.Lewis EF(1).Author information: (1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street,Boston, MA, 02115, USA, eflewis@partners.org.OPINION STATEMENT: I individualize my approach to each patient based upon theirunderstanding of their disease process, acuity of their progression to Stage Dheart failure, clinical setting (hospitalized vs outpatient), and family needs.My first goal is to prove intolerance of traditional therapies for heart failure by challenging patients with various medication combinations, including staggereddosing regimens and alternatives to angiotensin-converting enzymeinhibitors/β-blockers, and by considering cardiac resynchronization therapy ifthey meet criteria. As patients develop progressive hypotension and side effects from medicines, I often will discontinue these medicines after carefulcommunication. For patients with refractory heart failure, I consider cardiactransplantation for those who are candidates and left ventricular assist deviceas destination therapy for those who are not transplant candidates, both of whichrequire multidisciplinary input from psychiatrists, social workers, nurses, andcardiac surgeons. If patients are not candidates for these advanced therapies, I try to delineate their goals for living and discuss strategies to maximize their survival (however limited) and increase my focus on their quality of life byminimizing unnecessary testing. For the select patient, I use continuous inotropesupport only if this improves their quality of life and possibility of having ameaningful existence outside of the hospital. Palliative care consultants areoften involved at this stage. For the patient who is clearly at the end of life, I refer to hospice and focus on comfort. Return ambulatory visits and extent ofthe care received are guided by the preferences of the patient and their family. When there are disparate views of family members, especially when the patient is not cognitively able to participate in the discussion, I tend to be morepaternalistic in my approach to therapeutic options in an attempt to possiblydissipate family dynamic problems occurring after the patient dies.