: 8466342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2045. Ann Thorac Surg. 1993 Jan;55(1):65-71; discussion 71.Improved multiorgan function after prolonged univentricular support.Burnett CM(1), Duncan JM, Frazier OH, Sweeney MS, Vega JD, Radovancevic B.Author information: (1)Transplant Service, Texas Heart Institute/St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital,Houston 77225-0345.Eleven cardiac transplant candidates (all male; mean age, 43.3 years) withmultiorgan (hepatic, pulmonary, and/or renal) dysfunction were sustained forprolonged periods (> 30 days) with the HeartMate (Thermo Cardiosystems, Inc,Woburn, MA) left ventricular assist device. We evaluated the effect of extendedsupport on end-organ recovery and on the ultimate outcome of cardiactransplantation. In addition to cardiac failure, 9 patients had hepaticdysfunction, 8 had pulmonary dysfunction, and 6 had renal dysfunction (4 of whom required hemodialysis before left ventricular assist device support). Meanduration of support was 115 days (range, 31 to 233 days). All patients underwent successful transplantation; 10 of these patients survived a mean of 24 months.One patient, who had required hemodialysis and ventilatory support during andafter support, experienced progressive multiorgan failure and died 7 weeks after transplantation. Two late deaths after transplantation were unrelated to thedevice. Overall, patients experienced improvement in cardiac functional classstatus, and most participated in cardiac rehabilitation programs beforetransplantation. During left ventricular assist device support, hepatic function returned to normal in 8 patients, pulmonary function recovered in 7, and renalfunction returned to normal in 4. One patient who required hemodialysis underwentrenal transplantation after cardiac transplantation and had complete recovery of renal function. In the current era of donor shortages, gravely ill patients canbenefit from a strategy of prolonged left ventricular assist device support. Thisstrategy has proved safe, has allowed for reversal of multiorgan dysfunction, andhas produced healthier transplant candidates.