: 24368008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]297. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):E129-38. doi:10.1073/pnas.1314962111. Epub 2013 Dec 23.Cytoglobin modulates myogenic progenitor cell viability and muscle regeneration.Singh S(1), Canseco DC, Manda SM, Shelton JM, Chirumamilla RR, Goetsch SC, Ye Q, Gerard RD, Schneider JW, Richardson JA, Rothermel BA, Mammen PP.Author information: (1)Departments of Internal Medicine, Molecular Biology, and Pathology, the DonaldW. Reynolds Cardiovascular Clinical Research Center, and the Heart Failure,Ventricular Assist Device and Heart Transplant Program, University of TexasSouthwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390.Mammalian skeletal muscle can remodel, repair, and regenerate itself bymobilizing satellite cells, a resident population of myogenic progenitor cells.Muscle injury and subsequent activation of myogenic progenitor cells isassociated with oxidative stress. Cytoglobin is a hemoprotein expressed inresponse to oxidative stress in a variety of tissues, including striated muscle. In this study, we demonstrate that cytoglobin is up-regulated in activatedmyogenic progenitor cells, where it localizes to the nucleus and contributes tocell viability. siRNA-mediated depletion of cytoglobin from C2C12 myoblastsincreased levels of reactive oxygen species and apoptotic cell death both atbaseline and in response to stress stimuli. Conversely, overexpression ofcytoglobin reduced reactive oxygen species levels, caspase activity, and celldeath. Mice in which cytoglobin was knocked out specifically in skeletal musclewere generated to examine the role of cytoglobin in vivo. Myogenic progenitorcells isolated from these mice were severely deficient in their ability to formmyotubes as compared with myogenic progenitor cells from wild-type littermates.Consistent with this finding, the capacity for muscle regeneration was severelyimpaired in mice deficient for skeletal-muscle cytoglobin. Collectively, thesedata demonstrate that cytoglobin serves an important role in muscle repair andregeneration.PMCID: PMC3890830