: 25200052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]119. Tanaffos. 2014;13(1):48-51.Application of intra-aortic balloon pump in resection and anastomosis of trachea.Ahmadi ZH(1), Rahnemai-Azar AA(2), Shadmehr MB(3), Parsa T(4), Behzadnia N(1),Aval ZA(5), Mokri B(6), Gholamhoseini H(1).Author information: (1)Lung Transplantation Research Center, National Research Institute ofTuberculosis and Lung Diseases (NRITLD), Shahid Beheshti University of MedicalSciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Surgery, University of Miami, MillerSchool of Medicine, Miami, U.S.A. (3)Tracheal Diseases Research Center, NRITLD,Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (4)TelemedicineResearch Center, NRITLD, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (5)Pediatric Respiratory Diseases Research Center, NRITLD, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (6)Clinical Tuberculosis andEpidemiology Research Center, NRITLD, Shahid Beheshti University of MedicalSciences, Tehran, Iran.The intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) is a mechanical device used to assistcardiac circulatory function in patients suffering from cardiogenic shock,congestive heart failure, refractory angina and complications of myocardialinfarction. While using IABP in cardiac surgery is well established, there arefew studies on the utility of IABP support in high-risk cardiac patientsundergoing non-cardiac surgery. Major non-cardiac surgeries are associated withhigh rates of cardiac complications in patients with advanced coronary disease.Recent case studies have reported favorable outcomes with the use of IABP supportin non-cardiac surgery in patients with severe cardiac compromise. Using IABP mayreduce cardiac complications by providing hemodynamic stability. Here, we presentfive cases of IABP use in high-risk cardiac patients undergoing resection andanastomosis of the trachea. IABP was inserted prior to induction of anesthesia infour of the cases, while IABP insertion was withheld in one case. In the fourcases where IABP support was utilized, the IABP was removed between 6-48 hourspostoperatively with no complications. The patient who did not undergo IABPinsertion died on the 8th postoperative day due to uncontrollable pulmonary edemaand progressive myocardial infarction. We also review the literature and discuss the role of IABP use in non-cardiac surgery.PMCID: PMC4153278