: 8893563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1951. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996 Oct;112(4):1090-7.Activation of coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways in patients with leftventricular assist devices.Spanier T(1), Oz M, Levin H, Weinberg A, Stamatis K, Stern D, Rose E, Schmidt AM.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons,New York, N.Y. 10032, USA.Left ventricular assist devices have provided successful supportive therapy forpatients awaiting cardiac transplantation for extended periods of time. Although thromboembolic events have complicated support with these devices, the HeartMate left ventricular assist device developed by Thermo Cardiosystems, Inc., Woburn,Massachusetts, was specifically designed with a textured blood-contacting surfaceto minimize this risk. Clinical experience with this device has been encouraging,inasmuch as minimal thromboembolic complications have occurred despite theabsence of anticoagulation. The coagulation and fibrinolytic pathways in theseindividuals were investigated to better understand the hematologic status ofpatients treated with the Thermo Cardiosystems device. Despite apparently normal prothrombin and activated partial thromboplastin times, as well as plateletcounts, evidence of significant thrombin generation and fibrinolysis was present.To eliminate underlying cardiac failure as the responsible factor for theseabnormalities, we made similar measurements in patients with end-stage heartfailure who were not supported by an assist device or anticoagulation. Thesemeasurements revealed no evidence of thrombin generation or fibrinolysis. Thesedata demonstrate that patients supported with a left ventricular assist device,while successfully sustained without systemic anticoagulation, nevertheless have evidence of activation of coagulation. These phenomena appear to be related tothe presence of the device rather than to the underlying cardiac abnormalities.Although procoagulant and fibrinolytic pathways are apparently balanced in these patients, these data underscore the potential for the development of bleeding or thrombosis in clinically relevant settings.