: 24362897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]301. Int J Artif Organs. 2013 Dec;36(12):878-86. doi: 10.5301/ijao.5000257. Epub 2013 Oct 9.Investigation of hemodynamics in the assisted isolated porcine heart.Granegger M(1), Mahr S, Horvat J, Aigner P, Roehrich M, Stoiber M, Plasenzotti R,Zimpfer D, Schima H, Moscato F.Author information: (1)Center for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering, Medical University ofVienna, Vienna - Austria and Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster for CardiovascularResearch, Vienna - Austria.BACKGROUND: Currently, the interaction between rotary blood pumps (RBP) and theheart is investigated in silico, in vitro, and in animal models. Isolated anddefined changes in hemodynamic parameters are unattainable in animal models,while the heart-pump interaction in its whole complexity cannot be modeled invitro or in silico.AIM: The aim of this work was to develop an isolated heart setup to provide arealistic heart-pump interface with the possibility of easily adjustinghemodynamic parameters.METHODS: A mock circuit mimicking the systemic circulation was developed. Eightporcine hearts were harvested using a protocol similar to heart transplantation. Then, the hearts were resuscitated using Langendorff perfusion with rewarmed,oxygenated blood. An RBP was implanted and the setup was switched to the "workingmode" with the left heart and the RBP working as under physiologic conditions.Both the unassisted and assisted hemodynamics were monitored.RESULTS: In the unassisted condition, cardiac output was up to 9.5 l/min anddP/dtmax ranged from 521 to 3621 mmHg/s at a preload of 15 mmHg and afterload of 70 mmHg. With the RBP turned on, hemodynamics similar to heart-failure patientswere observed in each heart. Mean pump flow and flow pulsatility ranged from 0 to11 l/min. We were able to reproduce conditions with an open and closed aorticvalve as well as suction events.CONCLUSIONS: An isolated heart setup including an RBP was developed, whichcombines the advantages of in silico/vitro methods and animal experiments. Thistool thus provides further insight into the interaction between the heart and an RBP.