: 19185637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1125. Paediatr Anaesth. 2009 Apr;19(4):390-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9592.2008.02917.x.Epub 2009 Jan 27.Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography is beneficial for hemodynamicstabilization during left ventricular assist device implantation in children.Scohy TV(1), Gommers D, Maat AP, Dejong PL, Bogers AJ, Hofland J.Author information: (1)Department of Anaesthesiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, TheNetherlands.BACKGROUND: Mechanical circulatory support, with a left ventricular assist device(LVAD) is used in an increasing number of children for treatment of advancedheart failure as bridge-to-transplant. To date no data are available and nostudies have defined the role of intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) for hemodynamic stabilization during Centrimag Levitronix centrifugal pump implantation in children.METHODS: Children with therapy resistant heart failure, undergoing LVADimplantation using Berlin Heart Excor pediatric cannula connected to a LevitronixCentrifumag pump, are intraoperatively monitored using an Oldelft micromultiplaneTEE. Intraoperative TEE is specially used to monitor right ventricular (RV) andleft ventricular (LV) function, correct position of the cannulas and response to pharmacological treatment.RESULTS: In five consecutive patients RV function was assessed by TEE afterstarting LVAD Levitronix centrifugal pump. Initial RV failure presents with RVdilation and LV collapse. After titration of vasopressor and inotropic agents, RVcontractility improved and thereby the filling of the LV. In one child, despitethose measures the RV showed no improvement by TEE and a Levitronix rightventricular assist device to support the RV function was implanted as well. Allpatients could hemodynamically be stabilized before transport to the intensivecare unit.CONCLUSION: The complex interaction of the RV and LV function and correctpositioning of the cannula, during LVAD implantation in children with end-stagecardiac failure is improved by simultaneous visualization of cardiac performance of both ventricles and cannula positioning by means of intraoperative multiplane TEE.