: 12790040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1628. Ital Heart J. 2003 Mar;4(3):152-62.Cardiac-bio-assists: biological approaches to support or repair cardiac muscle.Carraro U(1), Rigatelli G.Author information: (1)CNR Institute of Neuroscience, Unit for Neuromuscular Biology andPathophysiology, Laboratory of Applied Myology, Department of BiomedicalSciences, University of Padua Medical School, Padua, Italy. ugo.carraro@unipd.itIn contrast to those of other cardiac diseases, the morbility and morbidity ofcongestive cardiac insufficiency are not on the decrease, in spite of significantprogress in pharmacological treatments and due to the increased life expectancyof the population. Cardiac transplant is the therapy of choice when cardiacfailure becomes pharmacologically intractable, but all over the developed world(not to mention the situation in the underdeveloped countries) the number ofheart transplants has reached the limit set by the availability of donor organs. Sooner or later xenotransplants could solve this problem, but even if our mostoptimistic hopes regarding their development and reliability are met,xenotransplants would still carry the risk of anthropozoonotic viral infections. Finally, as suggested in a recent overview, the way to the long-lasting clinical use of mechanical circulatory support is a long and winding road. Other optionsare related to tissue or cell cardiac bioassistance. Cardiac-bio-assists arebiological approaches to the remedy of progressive cardiac failure based onautologous or heterologous tissue or cell transplantation. Some of the workhypotheses are in pre-clinical evaluation (skeletal muscle ventricle), others areunder preliminary (cardiomyoplasty, myocardium reduction, implants of myoblastsderived from skeletal muscle satellite cells and implants of embryonic or adultstem cell-derived myocardiocytes, cellular cardiomyoplasty) or advanced clinical testing (dynamic aortomyoplasty and dynamic cardiomyoplasty). Dynamiccardiomyoplasty is a surgical procedure which could support myocardial functionwhen cardiac insufficiency would become pharmacologically intractable in the mid term. In this procedure a nonessential muscle, the latissimus dorsi (LD), isdiverted from its normal role, transferred into the chest, wrapped around theheart (LD wrap), conditioned to fatigue and activated during systole to providecardiac assistance. The mechanisms of its action are discussed and the risk ofmyodystrophic lesions of the LD wrap which could reduce the work capability ofthe pericardial muscle prosthesis remains. We are now addressing some of theseissues by means of clinical research on the group of Italian patients of demanddynamic cardiomyoplasty, and by means of animal experiments aimed at thedevelopment and testing of new surgical, clinical and biotechnologicalapproaches. In particular, we will discuss whether the increase in the musclemass of the distal part of the transposed LD is desirable and feasible or if itis mandatory.