: 22548818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]637. Curr Cardiol Rev. 2011 May;7(2):102-9. doi: 10.2174/157340311797484222.Mechanical circulatory support for end-stage heart failure in repaired andpalliated congenital heart disease.Clark JB(1), Pauliks LB, Myers JL, Undar A.Author information: (1)Penn State Hershey Pediatric Cardiovascular Research Center, Departments ofPediatrics, Penn State Hershey Childrens Hospital, Penn State Hershey College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.Approximately one in one hundred children is born with congenital heart disease. Most can be managed with corrective or palliative surgery but a small group will develop severe heart failure, leaving cardiac transplantation as the ultimatetreatment option. Unfortunately, due to the inadequate number of available donor organs, only a small number of patients can benefit from this therapy, andmortality remains high for pediatric patients awaiting heart transplantation,especially compared to adults. The purpose of this review is to describe thepotential role of mechanical circulatory support in this context and to reviewcurrent experience. For patients with congenital heart disease, ventricularassist devices are most commonly used as a bridge to cardiac transplantation, an application which has been shown to have several important advantages overmedical therapy alone or support with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation,including improved survival to transplant, less exposure to blood products withless immune sensitization, and improved organ function. While these devices mayimprove wait list mortality, the chronic shortage of donor organs for children islikely to remain a problem into the foreseeable future. Therefore, there is greatinterest in the development of mechanical ventricular assist devices as potentialdestination therapy for congenital heart disease patients with end-stage heartfailure. This review first discusses the experience with the currently available ventricular assist devices in children with congenital heart disease, and thenfollows to discuss what devices are under development and may reach the bedsidesoon.PMCID: PMC3197085