: 22841256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]596. Transplant Proc. 2012 Jul-Aug;44(6):1726-8. doi:10.1016/j.transproceed.2012.05.043.New circulatory support system: heartware.Ozbaran M(1), Yagdi T, Engin C, Nalbantgil S, Ayik F, Oguz E, Engin Y, Özturk P.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Ege University Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.INTRODUCTION: Through the new developments in medicine, heart failure therapy hasadvanced to mechanical circulatory support systems. The HeartWare VentricularAssist System HVAD; HeartWare, Inc.; Miramar, Fla, USA) is a new device that is acentrifugal, intracorporeal, miniaturized and continuous flow pump that servessimple patient use and enhanced life quality. This article reports the midtermresults of patients who underwent the heartware support system.MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively compiled our data from December 2010,including 10 patients of mean age 51.8 years with 90% males, 70% of the overallpatient cohort had dilated cardiomyopathy and remaining ones, ischemic disease.Mean left ventricular ejection fraction was 20.1% and mean systolic pulmonaryartery pressure was 49.2 mm Hg. A single patient was grade 1; seven were grade 2;and remaining ones, grade 3 according to the INTERMACS (Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support) scale. All patients were operated withcardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) with moderate hypothermia. Tricuspid ringannuloplasty was performed in 3 (30%) patients. In one patient we removed a left ventricular thrombus. In a case with severe aortic regurgitation, we placed asimple coaptation stitch at the central portion of the three aortic cusps underthe aortic cross clamp. The mean CPB duration was 95.5 minutes.RESULTS: There was no operative or in-hospital mortality. Mean support time was250.67 days. During the early postoperative period, one patient experienced aminor hemorrhagic neurological event also requiring a tracheostomy due topneumonia. This patient has completely healed and on follow-up continues a normallife. All patients were asymptomatic regarding heart failure. One patientunfortunately died because of possible pancreatic cancer and sepsis. Two patientsunderwent transplantations on days 159 and 172 of support.CONCLUSION: The HVAD system provided effective circulatory support for patientswith end-stage heart failure with low adverse event rates. Long-term results are needed particularly for destination therapy candidates.Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.