: 10728414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1823. J Card Surg. 1999 Mar-Apr;14(2):147-51.Heart transplantation in perspective.Keon WJ(1).Author information: (1)The University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ontario, Canada.Heart disease remains one of the leading causes of death in the western world. Inthe 35 years since the first human heart transplants, cardiac transplantation hasbecome established as the therapeutic option of choice in the management ofterminal cardiac failure. Since 1981, the introduction of cyclosporin forimmunosuppression has dramatically increased cardiac transplantation. However,several obstacles limit further utilization, including limited availability ofdonor hearts, limited ischemic time tolerated by donor hearts, and chronicrejection. Research is underway into donor heart preservation and newimmunosuppressant drugs in an effort to increase donor organ availability. Due tothese constraints, alternative therapies are under development. More than 2,000circulatory assist devices have been implanted with >25% used as a bridge toheart transplantation. The University of Ottawa Heart Institute began the firstCanadian implantation of circulatory assist devices in 1986 and has implanted 23 total artificial hearts and 23 ventricular assist devices. The Heart Institute isalso developing a totally implantable electrohydraulic ventricular assist device (EVAD) for long-term mechanical support outside the hospital. Another alternativebeing evaluated for clinical use is xenotransplantation. The major obstacle forwidespread use of clinical xenotransplantation remains graft rejection, andfundamental research is ongoing to address hyperacute and delayed xenograftrejection. While cardiac transplantation is the most effective treatment ofterminal heart failure, limited donor hearts compel us to rely on alternatives.In the future, the research underway on xenotransplantation and mechanicalcirculatory assist devices will provide new options for the clinical treatment ofterminal cardiac failure.