: 15153152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1531. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004 Jun;25(6):971-7.Implantable left ventricular assist device for treatment of pulmonaryhypertension in candidates for orthotopic heart transplantation-a preliminarystudy.Martin J(1), Siegenthaler MP, Friesewinkel O, Fader T, van de Loo A, Trummer G,Berchtold-Herz M, Beyersdorf F.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Albert-Ludwigs-University MedicalCenter, Hugstetter Str. 55, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.martin@ch11.ukl.uni-freiburg.deOBJECTIVES: Elevated pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) unresponsive topharmacological intervention is a major limitation in heart transplantation(HTX). The post-operative course of these patients is associated with anincreased risk of life-threatening right heart failure. We evaluated theefficiency of an implantable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) to decreasePVR by unloading the left ventricle and to lower the risk of later orthotopicHTX.METHODS: Six patients with end-stage heart failure (NYHA class IV) and 'fixed'pulmonary hypertension (PVR 5.7+/-0.7, range 4.4-6.5 Wood units) were analyzed.Despite maximal pharmacological intervention at initial evaluation (oxygeninhalation, nitrates, alprostadil infusion) PVR could not be reduced to under 2.5Wood units. Four patients received a TCI Heartmate, one patient a Novacor, andone patient a Jarvik 2000.RESULTS: All patients survived the LVAD implantation, four patients could bedischarged from hospital. Cardiac index and pulmonary artery pressure valuesreturned to normal during the early post-operative phase. After a mean supporttime of 191+/-86 days PVR had fallen to 2.0+/-1.2 (range 0.8-3.6) Wood units. Allpatients could be bridged to transplantation, one patient died 3 months aftertransplant, five patients are still alive after a mean follow-up of 16.2+/-10.5months.CONCLUSIONS: Mechanical support using an implantable LVAD is a very efficientapproach with an acceptable risk to treat severe pulmonary hypertension inend-stage heart failure patients before HTX. Adequate reduction of PVR can beexpected within 3-6 months. Subsequent HTX is associated with a good outcome.