: 25132977  [PubMed]125. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2014 Sep;148(3):1115-21; discussion 1021-2. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.05.063. Epub 2014 Jun 6.Outcomes after implantation of partial-support left ventricular assist devices ininotropic-dependent patients: Do we still need full-support assist devices?Sabashnikov A(1), Popov AF(2), Bowles CT(2), Mohite PN(2), Weymann A(2), HardsR(2), Hedger M(2), Wittwer T(3), Wippermann J(3), Wahlers T(3), Schoendube FA(4),Simon AR(2).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation and Mechanical CirculatorySupport, Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, Harefield Hospital,Harefield, Middlesex, United Kingdom; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery,University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Electronic address:a.sabashnikov@rbht.nhs.uk. (2)Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation andMechanical Circulatory Support, Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, Harefield Hospital, Harefield, Middlesex, United Kingdom. (3)Department ofCardiothoracic Surgery, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.(4)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Goettingen,Goettingen, Germany.OBJECTIVES: Partial-support left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) represent anovel strategy for heart failure treatment. The Synergy Pocket Micro-pump(HeartWare Inc, Framingham, Mass), the smallest surgically implanted long-termLVAD, provides partial flow up to 4.25 L/min and was primarily designed for "lesssick" patients with severe heart failure. This device is implanted minimallyinvasively without sternotomy or cardiopulmonary bypass. Early implantation inpatients with Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support class 4 and higher was shown to be feasible and associated with significantlyimproved hemodynamics and quality of life. The aim of this study was to presentour experience with implementation of long-term partial circulatory support as a bridge to transplantation in patients with more advanced heart failure who weredependent preoperatively on inotropic support or intra-aortic balloon pump.METHODS: In this observational study, only inotropic or intra-aortic balloonpump-dependent patients with end-stage heart failure were included (n = 12).These patients underwent Synergy device implantation between February 2012 andAugust 2013.RESULTS: The mean preoperative Interagency Registry for Mechanically AssistedCirculatory Support class was 2.17 ± 0.84 (class 1, 25%; class 2, 33%; class 3,42%). The mean age was 46 ± 15 years, and 33% were female. Preoperatively, 4patients (33%) had at least 1 previous sternotomy, 3 patients (25%) weresupported with a balloon pump, 1 patient (8%) had a previous full-support LVAD,and 4 patients (33%) had cerebrovascular events in the past. After deviceimplantation, there were no right ventricular failures, device-relatedinfections, hemorrhagic strokes, arterial or venous thromboembolisms, orworsenings of aortic and mitral regurgitation observed over the follow-up. Themean follow up was 174 ± 171 days (range, 5-764 days; cumulative, 3199 days). Onepatient (8%) died, 3 patients (25%) successfully underwent transplantation, 1device (8%) was explanted after myocardial recovery, and 5 patients (42%) arestill on ongoing support. Two patients (17%) were upgraded to a full-support LVADafter 65 days of mean support. A total of 11 of 12 patients (92%) were dischargedfrom the hospital and are presently alive. Left ventricular end-diastolicdiameter was significantly reduced 3 months after device implantation.CONCLUSIONS: Partial LVAD support may be clinically efficacious in inotropic and intra-aortic balloon pump-dependent patients. On the basis of our experience and evidence of previous research, such patients may benefit from minimally invasive access, no need for sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass, a short implantationtime, an easy exchange if necessary, and a lower risk of subsequent hearttransplantation. Because the implantation is performed without sternotomy, deviceupgrade is feasible with a comparatively low operative risk and good clinicaloutcome. Our preliminary results show that partial-support devices may have thepotential to replace full-support LVADs in the near future.Copyright © 2014 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published byMosby, Inc. All rights reserved.