: 16143233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1450. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005 Sep;24(9):1188-94.First clinical experience with the Incor left ventricular assist device.Schmid C(1), Tjan TD, Etz C, Schmidt C, Wenzelburger F, Wilhelm M, RothenburgerM, Drees G, Scheld HH.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital,Muenster, Germany. schmid@uni-muenster.deBACKGROUND: The Incor (Berlin Heart AG, Germany) is a small (200 g), implantable,magnetically accentuated axial flow pump (non-pulsatile flow) designed to supportthe left ventricle for extended periods of time. We report on the firstsingle-center clinical experience with this device.METHODS: The Incor was studied in 15 consecutive patients (10 men, 5 women), 24to 59 years of age. Underlying heart disease was end-stage ischemic heart disease(n = 5), acute myocardial infarction (n = 4), dilated cardiomyopathy (n = 3),acute myocarditis (n = 2) and Chagas disease (n = 1). All patients were in NewYork Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV heart failure. Four patients had prioropen heart surgery. Implantation via cannulation of the left ventricular apex andthe ascending aorta was elective in 6 patients and on an emergency basis in 9.RESULTS: No early bleeding complications were seen, but late bleeding occurred in4 patients. Minor cerebral thromboembolic events with transient neurologicsymptoms occurred in 3 patients; severe stroke had to be treated in 1 patient.Systemic emboli were seen in 2 patients. Thrombus-related pump dysfunction wassuspected in 3 patients, and managed by intensifying anti-coagulation. Fivepatients were successfully transplanted after a support interval of 90 to 156days; 1 patient could be weaned from the system after 171 days. Six patients diedduring support, 9 to 63 days after device implantation. The remaining 3 patients are still under support, with excellent quality of life.CONCLUSIONS: The Incor is a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) with transplantand adverse event rates comparable to those of other modern ventricular supportdevices. Its advantages include the small pump chamber, the virtual absence ofdevice-related infections, and the extraordinary convenience during implantation and explantation.