: 21596580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]790. Artif Organs. 2011 May;35(5):543-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.2010.01192.x.In vivo evaluation of the "TinyPump" as a pediatric left ventricular assistdevice.Kitao T(1), Ando Y, Yoshikawa M, Kobayashi M, Kimura T, Ohsawa H, Machida S,Yokoyama N, Sakota D, Konno T, Ishihara K, Takatani S.Author information: (1)Department of Artificial Organs, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo.Pediatric patients with end-stage heart failure require mechanical circulatorysupport (MCS) just as adults do. In order to meet the special requirements forneonates' and infants' MCS, pediatric circulatory support devices must be compactwith low priming volume, easily controllable with low flow, less traumatic forblood cells and tissues, and biocompatible with minimum anticoagulation. We have designed and developed a miniature rotary centrifugal blood pump, "TinyPump,"with a priming volume of 5 mL, which has already demonstrated its controllableperformance for low flow and durability in vitro. To evaluate the feasibility of the TinyPump as a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) suitable for neonates andinfants, we have examined the biocompatibility and hemodynamic performance of theTinyPump in a pediatric animal model using Shiba goats. The TinyPump is aminiaturized centrifugal pump weighing 150 g comprising a disposable pump headwith a 30-mm diameter impeller having six straight-vanes and a reusable motordriver. The impeller in the pump head is supported by a hydrodynamic bearing atits center and is driven by radial magnetic force coupled to the motor driver.TinyPump implantations were performed in 22 Shiba goats (17 female and 5 male),with body weights ranging from 8.4 to 27.2 kg. Under gas anesthesia, via leftlateral thoracotomy, a 22 Fr inflow cannula was inserted through the leftventricular apex, while a 6-mm outflow graft was anastomosed to the descendingaorta, which were then connected to a TinyPump mounted on the animal's back.Postoperative hemodynamic monitoring included heart rate, arterial and centralvenous pressure, pump flow, and rotation speed. Target pump flow in all animalswas maintained at 0.9 ± 0.1 L/min, which is approximately half the normalpulmonary artery flow measured in control animals. Blood samples were collectedto evaluate peripheral organ functions, hemolysis, and thrombosis. Goats weredivided into three groups-acute phase (6 h; n = 4), subchronic phase (6 h 2postoperative days [POD]; n = 11), and chronic phase (3 POD-16 POD; n = 8)-based on their survival duration. In the early experiments, hemolysis and thrombiformation at the impeller bearing resulted in termination of the study.Subsequent modifications of the bearing design, pump housing design, and magneticcoupling force helped to minimize the hemolysis and thrombi formation, prolongingthe survival duration of the Shiba goats to 2 weeks with minimum adverse effects on the blood components and organ functions. With further experiments andimprovements in pump durability and hemocompatibility, the TinyPump can serve as a suitable circulatory support device for neonates and infants bridging to heart transplantation as well as to heart recovery.© 2011, Copyright the Authors. Artificial Organs © 2011, International Center forArtificial Organs and Transplantation and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.