: 7719949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1998. Ann Thorac Surg. 1995 May;59(5):1063-7; discussion 1068.Use of aprotinin in LVAD recipients reduces blood loss, blood use, andperioperative mortality.Goldstein DJ(1), Seldomridge JA, Chen JM, Catanese KA, DeRosa CM, Weinberg AD,Smith CR, Rose EA, Levin HR, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, College of Physcians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.Comment in    Ann Thorac Surg. 1996 Apr;61(4):1288-9.Aprotinin, a bovine protease inhibitor, has been used extensively in patientsundergoing cardiac surgical procedures in an effort to minimize blood loss andprevent the complications associated with blood replacement. We sought toevaluate the effect of aprotinin on postoperative blood loss, renal function, andthe incidence of right ventricular failure in patients undergoing placement of a TCI Heartmate left ventricular assist device as a bridge to cardiactransplantation. Retrospective data analysis in 142 patients (42 receivingaprotinin and 100 untreated) demonstrated that the use of aprotinin wasassociated with a significant decrease in postoperative blood loss (p = 0.019)and in the intraoperative packed red blood cell transfusion (p = 0.019) and totalblood product (p = 0.016) requirements. A transient, yet significant, increase inthe postoperative creatinine level in the aprotinin group (p = 0.0006), but notin blood urea nitrogen level (p = 0.22), was noted. Interestingly, we noted anassociation between blood loss and the subsequent development of rightventricular failure; patients who required a right ventricular assist device bledsignificantly more than did those who did not suffer right ventricular failure (p= 0.02). Additionally, aprotinin recipients benefited by a reduction of nearlyone half in the incidence of the need for a right ventricular assist device. The incidence of perioperative mortality was reduced in those receiving aprotinincompared with that in untreated patients, (p = 0.05). We conclude that aprotinin is safe and effective in decreasing postoperative blood loss and intraoperativeblood product requirements, and in reducing perioperative mortality in patientsundergoing left ventricular assist device placement as a bridge to cardiactransplantation.