: 6616783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2164. Eur Heart J. 1983 Jan;4 Suppl A:211-7.Surgical and mechanical support of the failing heart.Turina M.The surgical treatment of acute heart failure is limited to cases of pressure or volume overload. Acute valvular regurgitation due to active endocarditis or toprosthetic dysfunction is a classic example of failure which can be cured byrestoring valvular competence. Acute pressure load is mostly caused by prostheticdysfunction or pulmonary embolism; therapy is aimed at removal of the causativeagent. Coronary heart disease can cause heart failure by volume overload: acutemitral incompetence or ventricular septal defect lend themselves to surgicalcorrection. In the surgical treatment of acute heart failure maximal attention isdevoted to optimal timing of surgery, anesthetic management and postoperativecare. Careful attention to the function of the right and left ventricle andcombination of catecholamines, afterload reducing agents and volume loadingtogether with respirator support have considerably improved the surgical results.Acute pump failure due to coronary insufficiency and infarction is less amenable to surgical treatment, with rare exceptions of emergencies during coronaryangiography and percutaneous dilatation. The intra-aortic balloon pump is theonly method of mechanical circulatory assistance which has reached widespreadclinical acceptance. The best results are achieved in conjunction with surgery:either as cardiac support in inherently reversible postoperative heart failure oras the means of circulatory stabilization prior to surgery. Ventricular assistdevices are still in the experimental stage: their use has been sharply curtailedby the virtual disappearance of the postoperative low output syndrome. Inselected cases of end-stage cardiomyopathy cardiac transplantation is nowadaysperformed with acceptable survival (70% at one year after surgery). Bothorthotopic and heterotopic transplantation (transplanted heart in parallel withthe natural one) give comparable results, but the procedure is still veryrestricted due to the lack of donors, multiple contraindications and lack ofsuitable heart preservation techniques.