: 25212547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]116. Artif Organs. 2015 Mar;39(3):220-7. doi: 10.1111/aor.12362. Epub 2014 Sep 10.Quality of life and emotional distress early after left ventricular assist deviceimplant: a mixed-method study.Modica M(1), Ferratini M, Torri A, Oliva F, Martinelli L, De Maria R, Frigerio M.Author information: (1)Cardiac Rehabilitation S. Maria Nascente, IRCCS Fondazione Don Gnocchi, Milan,Italy.Patients who temporarily or permanently rely on left ventricular assist devices(LVADs) for end-stage heart failure face complex psychological, emotional, andrelational problems. We conducted a mixed-method study to investigate quality of life, psychological symptoms, and emotional and cognitive reactions after LVADimplant. Twenty-six patients admitted to cardiac rehabilitation were administeredquality of life questionnaires (Short Form 36 of the Medical Outcomes Study andMinnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire), the Hospital Anxiety andDepression Scale, and the Coping Orientation for Problem Experiences inventory,and underwent three in-depth unstructured interviews within 2 months after LVADimplant. Quality of life assessment (Short Form 36) documented persistently lowphysical scores whereas mental component scores almost achieved normative values.Clinically relevant depression and anxiety were observed in 18 and 18% ofpatients, respectively; avoidant coping scores correlated significantly with bothdepression and anxiety (Pearson correlation coefficients 0.732, P < 0.001 and0.764, P < 0.001, respectively). From qualitative interviews, factors thatimpacted on LVAD acceptance included: device type, disease experience duringtransplant waiting, nature of the assisted organ, quality of patient-doctorcommunication, the opportunity of sharing the experience, and recipient'spsychological characteristics. Quality of life improves early after LVAD implant,but emotional distress may remain high. A multidimensional approach that takesinto account patients' psychological characteristics should be pursued to enhanceLVAD acceptance.Copyright © 2014 International Center for Artificial Organs and Transplantationand Wiley Periodicals, Inc.