: 25106864  [PubMed - in process]130. Oncologist. 2014 Sep;19(9):985-9. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0025. Epub 2014Aug 5.Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation as a bridge to chemotherapy in an OrthodoxJewish patient.Meltzer EC(1), Ivascu NS(2), Acres CA(2), Stark M(2), Furman RR(2), Fins JJ(2).Author information: (1)Division of Medical Ethics, Department of Anesthesia, and Division ofHematology and Medical Oncology, Center for Lymphoma and Myeloma, Weill CornellMedical College and New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York, USAelc9076@med.cornell.edu. (2)Division of Medical Ethics, Department of Anesthesia,and Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Center for Lymphoma and Myeloma,Weill Cornell Medical College and New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NewYork, USA.OBJECTIVE: Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) forcardiopulmonary support offers survival possibilities to patients who otherwisewould succumb to cardiac failure. Often referred to as "a bridge to recovery,"involving a ventricular assist device or cardiac transplantation, this technologyonly affords temporary cardiopulmonary support. Physicians may have concernsabout initiating VA-ECMO in patients who, in the absence of recovery or transfer to longer-term therapies, might assert religious or cultural objections to theterminal discontinuation of life-sustaining therapy (LST). We present a novelcase of VA-ECMO use in an Orthodox Jewish woman with potentially curable lymphomaencasing her heart to demonstrate the value of anticipating and preemptivelyresolving foreseeable disputes.PATIENT: A 40-year-old Hasidic Orthodox Jewish woman with lymphoma encasing herright and left ventricles decompensated from heart failure before chemotherapyinduction. The medical team, at an academic medical center in New York City,proposed VA-ECMO as a means for providing cardiopulmonary support to enablereceipt of chemotherapy. Owing to the patient's religious tradition, whichcustomarily prohibits terminal discontinuation of LST, clinical staff asked foran ethics consultation to plan for initiation and discontinuation of VA-ECMO.INTERVENTIONS: Meetings were held with the treating clinicians, clinical ethicsconsultants, family, religious leaders, and cultural liaisons. Through adeliberative process, VA-ECMO was reconceptualized as a bridge to treatment andnot as an LST, a designation assigned to the chemotherapy on this occasion, giventhe mortal threat posed by the encasing tumor.CONCLUSION: Traditional religious objections to the terminal discontinuation ofLST need not preclude initiation of VA-ECMO. The potential for disputes should beanticipated and steps taken to preemptively address such conflicts. Thereconceptualization of VA-ECMO as a bridge to treatment, rather than as an LST,can allow patients with objections to the terminal discontinuation of LST toreceive interventions, such as chemotherapy, that might otherwise be precluded bycritical physiology.©AlphaMed Press.PMCID: PMC4153457 [Available on 2015-09-01]