: 22759798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]612. Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Sep;135(3):337-54. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.06.006.Epub 2012 Jun 29.Regression of pathological cardiac hypertrophy: signaling pathways andtherapeutic targets.Hou J(1), Kang YJ.Author information: (1)Regenerative Medicine Research Center, West China Hospital, SichuanUniversity, Chengdu, China.Pathological cardiac hypertrophy is a key risk factor for heart failure. It isassociated with increased interstitial fibrosis, cell death and cardiacdysfunction. The progression of pathological cardiac hypertrophy has long beenconsidered as irreversible. However, recent clinical observations andexperimental studies have produced evidence showing the reversal of pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Left ventricle assist devices used in heart failure patientsfor bridging to transplantation not only improve peripheral circulation but also often cause reverse remodeling of the geometry and recovery of the function ofthe heart. Dietary supplementation with physiologically relevant levels of coppercan reverse pathological cardiac hypertrophy in mice. Angiogenesis is essentialand vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a constitutive factor for theregression. The action of VEGF is mediated by VEGF receptor-1, whose activationis linked to cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase-1 (PKG-1) signaling pathways,and inhibition of cyclic GMP degradation leads to regression of pathologicalcardiac hypertrophy. Most of these pathways are regulated by hypoxia-induciblefactor. Potential therapeutic targets for promoting the regression include:promotion of angiogenesis, selective enhancement of VEGF receptor-1 signalingpathways, stimulation of PKG-1 pathways, and sustention of hypoxia-induciblefactor transcriptional activity. More exciting insights into the regression ofpathological cardiac hypertrophy are emerging. The time of translating theconcept of regression of pathological cardiac hypertrophy to clinical practice iscoming.Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC3458709