: 23219332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]529. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012 Dec;31(12):1241-52. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2012.10.012.Statement regarding the pre and post market assessment of durable, implantableventricular assist devices in the United States.Acker MA(1), Pagani FD, Stough WG, Mann DL, Jessup M, Kormos R, Slaughter MS,Baldwin T, Stevenson L, Aaronson KD, Miller L, Naftel D, Yancy C, Rogers J,Teuteberg J, Starling RC, Griffith B, Boyce S, Westaby S, Blume E, Wearden P,Higgins R, Mack M.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. michael.acker@uphs.upenn.eduThe incorporation of complex medical device technologies into clinical practiceis governed by critical oversight of the United States Food and DrugAdministration. This regulatory process requires a judicious balance betweenassuring safety and efficacy, while providing efficient review to facilitateaccess to innovative therapies. Recent contrasting views of the regulatoryprocess have emphasized the difficulties in obtaining an optimal balance.Mechanical circulatory support has evolved to become an important therapy forpatients who have advanced heart failure with the advent of more durable,implantable ventricular assist devices. The regulatory oversight of these newtechnologies has been difficult owing to the complexities of these devices,associated adverse event profile, and severity of illness of the intended patientpopulation. Maintaining a regulatory environment to foster efficient introductionof safe and effective technologies is critical to the success of ventricularassist device therapy and the health of patients with advanced heart failure.Physicians representing key surgical and cardiology societies, andrepresentatives from the Food and Drug Administration, National Heart Lung, andBlood Institute, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Inter-agencyRegistry of Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support, and industry partnersgathered to discuss relevant issues regarding the current regulatory environment assessing ventricular assist devices. The goal of the meeting was to exploreinnovative ways to foster the introduction of technologically advanced, safe, andeffective ventricular assist devices. The following summary reflects opinions andconclusions endorsed by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, American Associationfor Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, Heart Failure Society ofAmerica, International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation, andInteragency Registry of Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support.Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.