: 10455947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1850. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1999 Jul;18(7):654-63.Prognostic indices in heart transplant candidates after the first hospitalizationtriggered by the need for intravenous pharmacologic circulatory support.Gronda EG(1), Barbieri P, Frigerio M, Mangiavacchi M, Oliva F, Quaini E,Andreuzzi B, Garascia A, De Vita C, Pellegrini A.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiology, 1st Division, A. De Gasperis Center, NiguardaHospital, Milan, Italy.BACKGROUND: Patients with heart failure refractory to optimal oral pharmacologic therapy have a dismal short term prognosis. Heart transplantation is the onlytherapy shown to improve survival in these patients. Unfortunately, due to thecritical shortage of donor organs, approximately 30% of listed patients withend-stage heart failure die before a suitable donor heart becomes available. The principal aim of this study was to determine whether intravenous pharmacologiccirculatory support favorably influences the clinical course of heart transplant candidates or whether mechanical circulatory support should be instituted in thishigh risk patient population.METHODS: Data from 154 consecutive hospitalizations in 125 patients 49+/-12 yearswere retrospectively reviewed. The product limit method was used to estimatesurvival. Multiple logistic regression analysis was used to identify the clinicaland hemodynamic variables that independently predict outcome after each admissionin which heart transplantation did not occur.RESULTS: One year survival for the study population was 65%. This survival issignificantly lower than the 91% 1 year survival in similarly ill patientsundergoing heart transplantation. The Cox proportional hazard method identifiedserum bilirubin, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum sodium levels and right atrial pressure as independent prognostic indices. Serum bilirubin, BUN levels andduration of intravenous pharmacologic circulatory support were associated with a poor outcome. A composite index including serum bilirubin and BUN levelspredicted outcome with a sensitivity and specificity of 79% and 77%,respectively. The addition of pharmacologic support duration increased themodel's sensitivity to 95%, but did not significantly alter specificity that was 74%. Of the 125 patients hospitalized due to the need to initiate intravenouspharmacologic support for the first time (index hospitalization), 69 (55%) weredischarged after optimization of medical therapy. Of 21 patients who did notundergo transplantation during the follow-up period, 18 (86%) died within 2 yearsof the index hospitalization. The duration of intravenous pharmacologic supportbeyond which prognosis dramatically worsens without heart transplantation is 21days.CONCLUSION: Heart transplant candidates who require intravenous pharmacologiccirculatory support for more than 21 days and do not receive a suitable donorheart within this period of time have a high mortality. Alternative therapies,such as implantation of a mechanical circulatory assist device should beconsidered in this high risk population.