: 24621970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]228. JACC Heart Fail. 2013 Jun;1(3):259-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.03.008. Epub 2013Jun 3.Resting heart rate and heart rate reserve in advanced heart failure have distinctpathophysiologic correlates and prognostic impact: a prospective pilot study.Benes J(1), Kotrc M(1), Borlaug BA(2), Lefflerova K(1), Jarolim P(3), BendlovaB(4), Jabor A(1), Kautzner J(1), Melenovsky V(5).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiology, Institute of Clinical and ExperimentalMedicine-IKEM, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Division of Cardiovascular Diseases,Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (3)Department ofPathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,Massachusetts. (4)Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, Czech Republic.(5)Department of Cardiology, Institute of Clinical and ExperimentalMedicine-IKEM, Prague, Czech Republic; Division of Cardiovascular Diseases,Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. Electronic address:vojtech.melenovsky@ikem.cz.Comment in    JACC Heart Fail. 2013 Jun;1(3):267-9.OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to compare the prognostic impact ofclinical and biomarker correlates of resting heart rate (HR) and chronotropicincompetence in heart failure (HF) patients.BACKGROUND: The mechanisms and underlying pathophysiological influences of HRabnormalities in HF are incompletely understood.METHODS: In a prospective pilot study, 81 patients with advanced systolic HF (97%were receiving beta-blockers) and 25 age-, sex-, and body-size matched healthycontrols underwent maximal cardiopulmonary exercise testing with sampling ofneurohormones and biomarkers.RESULTS: Two-thirds of HF patients met criteria for chronotropic incompetence.Resting HR and HR reserve (HRR, a measure of chronotropic response) were notcorrelated with each other and were associated with distinct biomarker profiles. Resting HR correlated with increased myocardial stress (B-type natriureticpeptide [BNP]: r = 0.26; pro-A-type natriuretic peptide: r = 0.24;N-terminal-proBNP: r = 0.32) and inflammation (leukocyte count: r = 0.28;high-sensitivity C-reactive protein assay: r = 0.25). In contrast, HRR correlatedwith the neurohumoral response to HF (copeptin: r = -0.33; norepinephrine: r =-0.29) but not with myocyte stress or injury reflected by natriuretic peptides orhs-troponin I. Patients in the lowest chronotropic incompetence quartile (HRR≤0.38) displayed more advanced HF, reduced exercise capacity, ventilatoryinefficiency, and poorer quality of life. Over a median follow-up of 17 months,the combined endpoint of death or urgent transplant/assist device implantationoccurred more frequently in patients with higher resting HR (>67 beats/min) orlower HRR, with both markers providing additive prognostic information.CONCLUSIONS: Increased resting HR and chronotropic incompetence may reflectdifferent pathophysiological processes, provide incremental prognosticinformation, and represent distinct therapeutic targets.Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by ElsevierInc. All rights reserved.