: 10870319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1813. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2000 Jul;18(1):112-6.Results with the Novacor assist system and evaluation of long-term assistance.Di Bella I(1), Pagani F, Banfi C, Ardemagni E, Capo A, Klersy C, Viganò M.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Policlinico San Matteo, IRCCS, Piazzale Golgi2, 27100, Pavia, Italy.OBJECTIVE: The great number of patients awaiting heart transplant and theshortage of donors has led to the increasing use of left ventricular assistdevices (LVAD) for those patients that cannot wait only on medical therapy. Inthis study we analyze our experience in order to evaluate the possibility oflong-term assistance.METHODS: We have implanted LVAD Novacor in 36 patients with a mean age of 50.4years. They were all critical candidates for transplant on high doses ofinotrops. We evaluated the clinical and hemodynamic results and studiedstatistically the relative risk of complications at different time intervals ofsupport.RESULTS: In all cases we had a statistically significant improvement of: cardiac output, wedge pressure, pulmonary vascular resistance and mean pulmonarypressure. Eleven patients died on the device, 23 underwent heart transplant andtwo are still on the device. Causes of death were mostly related tocerebrovascular events or multiorgan failure. Seven of the 23 patients whounderwent heart transplant died with a survival rate after transplant of 69.5%and an overall survival rate of 50%. Complications occurred in 33 patients with: 24 strokes, eight TIAs, four cerebral hemorrhages, three peripheral embolisms,seven cable infections, two pocket infections, two sepsis, two major lunginfections, one mediastinitis, one right ventricular failure and three multiorganfailure. Time-related analysis showed that these complications occurred mostlyduring the first 3 months of assistance and this is particularly true forcerebrovascular events. The incidence of infections remained constant during the follow-up period. With a mean time of assistance of 203.1 days we had only twocases of device malfunction at 662 and 1297 days.CONCLUSIONS: LVAD Novacor has provided reliable mechanical performance and goodhemodynamic improvement. Most complications seem to occur in the first 90 days,therefore long-term assistance could be considered. A reduction of the high rate of thromboembolic complications remains mandatory to improve the clinicalresults.