: 7979685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2007. Circulation. 1994 Nov;90(5 Pt 2):II87-91.Artificial circulatory support with textured interior surfaces. Acounterintuitive approach to minimizing thromboembolism.Rose EA(1), Levin HR, Oz MC, Frazier OH, Macmanus Q, Burton NA, Lefrak EA.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, NY 10032.BACKGROUND: Although numerous left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) have beenused clinically, frequent thromboembolic complications have been reported despitethe smooth interior LVAD surfaces and systemic anticoagulant medication. Incontrast, the Thermo Cardiosystems HeartMate 1000 IP LVAD has textured interiorsurfaces that are promptly covered by a densely adherent neointima. Wehypothesize that elimination of a direct interface between prosthetic materialand blood elements reduces the risk of peripheral embolization and minimizes the necessity for systemic anticoagulant medication. This report defines thethromboembolic risk of this type of LVAD and characterizes the nature andeffectiveness of the various anticoagulation regimens that were tested during theinitial clinical trial with this device.METHODS AND RESULTS: All values are reported as mean +/- SD. Fifty-four males andthree females with an average age of 47 +/- 11 years were supported with theHeartMate 1000 IP LVAD for an average of 62 +/- 76 days at 11 clinical centers inthe United States. Patients were prospectively evaluated for thromboemboliccomplications. Five different anticoagulation regimens were used during the first4 postoperative weeks: no anticoagulants, low-molecular-weight dextran, heparin, dipyridamole plus aspirin, or miscellaneous agents. After the first 4 weeks, the patients were treated with aspirin plus dipyridamole or miscellaneous agents.Prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and fibrinogen valuesfor the patients were measured at 0.1, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 32, and 46weeks during support. Two patients (3.5%) suffered thromboembolic cerebrovascularcomplications, an incidence of 0.2 episodes per patient-year of observation. One episode was due to fungal vegetation developing on the device and the other wasdue to embolization from a previously placed native mechanical aortic valveprosthesis. In the absence of infection, there were no device-relatedthromboembolic complications. Mean prothrombin time for all groups was 13.3 +/-0.5 seconds with no significant intergroup differences. Mean partialthromboplastin time during the first 4 weeks for the heparin-treated group was53.3 +/- 6.6 seconds, which was significantly longer than for all other groups,but fell to control values after heparin was discontinued at 4 weeks. Meanfibrinogen level for all groups was 370 +/- 48 mg/dL, with no intergroupdifferences.CONCLUSIONS: The HeartMate 1000 IP LVAD provides adequate circulatory supportwith a low risk of thromboembolism despite minimal systemic anticoagulation. The use of textured surfaces may be an important factor contributing to the lowobserved risk of thromboembolic complications.