: 1395213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2061. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1992 Sep-Oct;11(5):S320-7.Voltage-dependent performance of skeletal muscle pouches: implications forcardiomyoplasty.George DT(1), DiLoreto GV, Cheng W, Corin WJ, Santamore WP.Author information: (1)Philadelphia Heart Institute, Presbyterian Medical Center, PA 19104.Cardiomyoplasty, a new therapy for heart failure, uses autologous skeletal muscleto mechanically assist the heart. The success of dynamic cardiomyoplasty iscritically dependent on the contraction strength of the assisting skeletalmuscle. Unlike cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle contracts in a graded response to electrical stimulation. However, in current cardiomyoplasty practice, nosystematic technique exists to set the stimulating voltage effecting skeletalmuscle contraction. The stimulating voltage is simply set to some multiple of the"threshold" voltage. Furthermore, researchers do not consider the role ofstimulating voltage when they determine the amount of assistance afforded during cardiomyoplasty. To more accurately assess the value of this heuristicvoltage-setting technique, we investigated the role of stimulating voltage on thestrength of contraction of the latissimus dorsi muscle. Six New Zealand whiterabbits had isovolumic hydraulic pouches constructed from the latissimus dorsimuscle. The muscles were wrapped around a compliant balloon in which isovolumicpressure development was measured during tetany-inducing burst (pulse-train)stimulation. The tetanic plateau of the pouch pressure record was used to measurethe effects of stimulating voltage on skeletal muscle contraction. Resultsindicated that (1) increasing stimulating voltage from two to four times the"threshold" voltage increased normalized pouch pressure from 0.38 +/- 0.21 to0.78 +/- 0.12 (mean +/- SD) (p < 0.05); (2) the threshold-normalized voltagenecessary to cause maximal muscle contraction varied widely (5.7 +/- 2.0, mean+/- SD; range, 3.1 to 9.3); and (3) the current achieving maximal pressuredevelopment varied from 5.6 to 31.4 mA (19.9 +/- 10.4 mA).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)