: 21256765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]859. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011 Apr;39(4):e44-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2010.11.074.Epub 2011 Jan 20.Supportive psychotherapy for patients with heart transplantation or ventricularassist devices.Heilmann C(1), Kuijpers N, Beyersdorf F, Berchtold-Herz M, Trummer G, Stroh AL,Schlensak C, Fritzsche K.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, University Heart Center Freiburg-BadKrozingen, Hugstetter Str. 55, 79196 Freiburg, Germany.claudia.heilmann@uniklinik-freiburg.deOBJECTIVE: Both heart transplant (HTX) candidates and patients on ventricularassist device (VAD) support suffer from severe heart failure and have to fearlife-threatening complications. For both patient groups, the importance ofscreening for and treatment of psychosocial problems and mental disorders tooptimize compliance and survival has been acknowledged. We compared the use ofpsychotherapeutic support by patients with primary HTX, on VAD support, either ondestination therapy or to be transplanted, and successfully bridged totransplant. In addition, we evaluated the use for supportive psychotherapy forthe families of our patients and present two typical cases.METHODS: Patients with primary HTX (HTX(prim), n=16), with VAD on destinationtherapy (VAD(dest), n=15), with VAD waiting for transplant (VAD(htx), n=9), andpatients who have been successfully bridged on VAD to transplant (HTX(vad), n=11)were analyzed during the preoperative and the in-hospital postoperative period.International Classification of Diseases (ICD 10) diagnoses, number of contactswith the psychologist, time expenses for individual interventions, familyinterventions, and concomitant communication were assessed.RESULTS: Adjustment disorders were the most prevalent disturbances. HTX(vad)patients needed more psychotherapeutic interventions and required more time forindividual support than HTX(prim) patients. Partners and families of almostone-half of all patients made use of supportive psychotherapy; there were nodifferences between the groups with regard to the needed time. Further, thegroups did not differ in the time expenses for concomitant communication with thepsychologist. At the latest contact with the psychologist, three VAD(dest)patients did not need further psychotherapy at this time; also, one VAD patientwaiting for transplant and two after primary HTX were psychosocially stable.CONCLUSION: Our data reflect the high emotional distress, especially of HTX(vad) patients. Our data suggest further that patients on VAD support experiencepsychosocial and emotional stress as severe as HTX candidates and recipients do. Patients on destination therapy and those who are waiting for transplantation do not differ in this regard. The high complexity of the psychosocial problems ofVAD and HTX patients warrants professional psychotherapeutic support.Copyright © 2010 European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. Published byElsevier B.V. All rights reserved.