: 9436569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1903. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997 Dec;30(7):1773-7.Implantable left ventricular assist devices provide an excellent outpatientbridge to transplantation and recovery.DeRose JJ Jr(1), Umana JP, Argenziano M, Catanese KA, Gardocki MT, Flannery M,Levin HR, Sun BC, Rose EA, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032, USA. JJD11@columbia.eduOBJECTIVES: Our recent experience with outpatient left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support is presented to demonstrate the possibilities and limitations oflong-term outpatient mechanical circulatory assistance.BACKGROUND: The experience with inpatient LVAD support as a bridge totransplantation has proved the efficacy of such therapy in improving circulatory hemodynamic status, restoring normal end-organ function and facilitating patient rehabilitation. With miniaturization of the power supplies and controllers, such mechanical circulatory support can now be accomplished in an outpatient setting.METHODS: Between March 1993 and February 1997, 32 patients (26 male, 6 female,mean [+/-SEM] age 49 +/- 15 years) underwent implantation of theThermoCardiosystems (TCI) Heartmate vented electric (VE) LVAD. The VE LVAD ispowered by batteries worn on shoulder holsters and is operated by a belt-mounted system controller, allowing unrestricted patient ambulation and hospitaldischarge.RESULTS: Mean duration of support was 122 +/- 26 days (range 3 to 605), with asurvival rate to transplantation or explantation of 78%. Nineteen patients weredischarged from the hospital on mean postoperative day 41 +/- 4 (range 17 to 68),for an outpatient support time of 108 +/- 30 days (range 2 to 466). Four patientsunderwent early transplantation and could not participate in the dischargeprogram, and three patients currently await discharge. The complication rate was not statistically different from that encountered in our previous 52 patientswith a pneumatic LVAD.CONCLUSIONS: Outpatient LVAD support is safe and provides improved quality oflife for patients awaiting transplantation. Wearable and totally implantableLVADs should be studied as permanent treatment options for patients who are notcandidates for heart transplantation.