: 21796452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]755. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2011 Oct;13(4):405-9. doi:10.1510/icvts.2011.273722. Epub 2011 Jul 25.How does successful bridging with ventricular assist device affect cardiactransplantation outcome?Urban M(1), Pirk J, Dorazilova Z, Netuka I.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Institute for Clinical and ExperimentalMedicine, Videnska 1958/9, 14021 Prague, Czech Republic. maub@ikem.czA best evidence topic in cardiac surgery was written according to a structuredprotocol. The issue was to determine the impact of bridge-to-transplantventricular assist device support on survival after cardiac transplantation.Altogether 428 papers were found using the reported search, of which 12represented the best evidence to answer the clinical question. The authors,journal, date and country of publication, patient group studied, study type,relevant outcomes and results of these papers are tabulated. The treatmentoptions for patients with advanced heart failure or those with deterioratingend-organ function on maximal medical therapy are limited to intravenousinotropes and mechanical assistance with intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) orventricular assist device (VAD). Studies exploring the effect of VADs onpost-transplant mortality have yielded conflicting results. The Registry of theInternational Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation continues to identifymechanical support as a risk factor for decreased survival after transplantation.A limitation of this report is that the multivariable adjustment uses variablesrecorded not at the time of device implant but at the time of transplant. Some ofthe recipient characteristics thus may be altered by the device implant. Comparedwith the previous reports the latest data show improvement in post-transplantsurvival in the recent era. In addition, the excess risk appears to be limited tothe early post-transplant period. Experienced centers consistently reportoutstanding post-transplant results with left ventricular assist device (LVAD)bridging. Of the 12 papers seven showed no difference in survival, and fiveshowed a reduced survival. In the papers showing no difference, one year survivalaveraged from 85% in supported patients to 87% in non-supported patients. Inpapers reporting a difference in outcome, one year averaged survival was 74% inLVAD recipients compared to 90% in non-bridged patients. Decreased survival isassociated with patients suffering from dilated cardiomyopathy, transplantedwithin two weeks of LVAD implantation and bridged to transplantation before 2003 as opposed to patients transplanted more recently. Based on the availableevidence we conclude that in selected patients survival after hearttransplantation in patients bridged with VAD is comparable to those who did notreceive the device.