: 23788197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]414. Prog Transplant. 2013 Jun;23(2):147-53. doi: 10.7182/pit2013766.Nursing patients with ventricular assist devices: an interpretive description.Gibson JA(1), Henderson A, Jillings C, Kaan A.Author information: (1)University of British Columbia School of Nursing, Vancouver, Canada V6Z 1Y6.jgibson@providencehealth.bc.caCONTEXT-Although researchers have studied the experience of caring for patientswith ventricular assist devices from the perspective of family caregivers, fewreports address the experience of nursing patients with such devices. OBJECTIVE-To investigate the experience of nursing patients who have a ventricular assist device. DESIGN -A qualitative approach called interpretive description was usedto conduct semistructured, 1-on-1 interviews. PARTICIPANTS-Six registered nurses with a range of clinical experiences were interviewed in a 1-year period from2009 to 2010. Data were transcribed and analyzed by the researcher in conjunctionwith a research team. RESULTS-Four distinct themes were interpreted from theinterview data: exclusive knowledge, human connection, ethics, andinterdisciplinary stress and technology. CONCLUSION -Nursing patients who have a ventricular assist device is a complex experience. Nurses develop expertknowledge that is related to direct exposure to patients; this unique knowledgeshould be formally considered in team decision making. Nursing care of patientswho have a ventricular assist device also has features that might result inoverconnected nurse-patient relationships. Closely connected nurse-patientrelationships intensified the emotional difficultly of experiences of exposure toillness or suffering, or exposure to an unpredictable dying trajectory. Nursingpatients with ventricular assist devices can be difficult, and nursing leadersshould be aware of the emotional reactions that can result from direct exposureto patients who might be perceived as very ill or suffering. Institutions withventricular assist device programs should consider providing emotional supportfor health care workers who find this type of work emotionally difficult.