: 25841881  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]20. Surg Today. 2015 Apr 4. [Epub ahead of print]Building a bridge to recovery: the pathophysiology of LVAD-induced reversemodeling in heart failure.Miyagawa S(1), Toda K, Nakamura T, Yoshikawa Y, Fukushima S, Saito S, Yoshioka D,Saito T, Sawa Y.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School ofMedicine, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.Heart failure mainly caused by ischemic or dilated cardiomyopathy is alife-threatening disorder worldwide. The previous work in cardiac surgery has ledto many excellent surgical techniques for treating cardiac diseases, and theseprocedures are now able to prolong the human lifespan. However, surgicaltreatment for end-stage heart failure has been under-explored, although leftventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation and heart transplantation areoptions to treat the condition. LVAD can provide powerful circulatory support forend-stage heart failure patients and improve the survival and quality of lifeafter implantation compared with the existing medical counterparts. Moreover,LVADs play a crucial role in the "bridge to transplantation", "bridge torecovery" and recently have served as "destination therapy". The structural andmolecular changes that improve the cardiac function after LVAD implantation arecalled "reverse remodeling", which means that patients who have received a LVADcan be weaned from the LVAD with restoration of their cardiac function. Thisstrategy is a desirable alternative to heart transplantation in terms of both thepatient quality of life and due to the organ shortage. The mechanism of thisbridge to recovery is interesting, and is different from other treatments forheart failure. Bridge to recovery therapy is one of the options in regenerativetherapy which only a surgeon can provide. In this review, we pathophysiologicallyanalyze the reverse remodeling phenomenon induced by LVAD and comment about theclinical evidence with regard to its impact on the bridge to recovery.