: 25770085  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]32. Radiographics. 2015 Mar-Apr;35(2):327-56. doi: 10.1148/rg.352140149.Building a bridge to save a failing ventricle: radiologic evaluation of short-and long-term cardiac assist devices.Mohamed I(1), Lau CT, Bolen MA, El-Sherief AH, Azok JT, Karimov JH, Moazami N,Renapurkar RD.Author information: (1)From the Sections of Thoracic Imaging (I.M., C.T.L., M.A.B., A.H.E., J.T.A.,R.D.R.) and Cardiovascular Imaging (M.A.B.), Imaging Institute, Section ofBiomedical Engineering (J.H.K., N.M.), and Section of Thoracic and CardiovascularSurgery, Heart and Vascular Institute (N.M.), Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Ave, Room L10, Cleveland, OH 44195.Heart failure is recognized with increasing frequency worldwide and oftenprogresses to an advanced refractory state. Although the reference standard fortreatment of advanced heart failure remains cardiac transplantation, theincreasing shortage of donor organs and the unsuitability of many patients fortransplantation surgery has led to a search for alternative therapies. One suchtherapy is mechanical circulatory support, which helps relieve the load on theventricle and thereby allows it to recover function. In addition, there isincreasing evidence supporting the use of mechanical devices as a bridge torecovery in patients with acute refractory heart failure. In this article, theimaging evaluation of various commonly used short- and long-term cardiac assistdevices is discussed, and their relevant mechanisms of action and physiology are described. Imaging, particularly computed tomography (CT), plays a crucial rolein preoperative evaluation for assessment of candidacy for implantation of a leftventricular assist device (LVAD) or total artificial heart (TAH). Also,echocardiography and CT are indispensable in assessment of complicationsassociated with cardiac devices. Complications commonly associated withshort-term assist devices include bleeding and malpositioning, whereas long-term devices such as LVADs may be associated with infection, pump thrombosis, andcannula malfunction, as well as bleeding. CT is also commonly performed forpreoperative planning before LVAD or TAH explantation, replacement of a device orone of its components, and cardiac transplantation. Online supplemental material is available for this article.(©)RSNA, 2015.