: 23187051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]534. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013 Feb;43(2):258-67. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezs588. Epub2012 Nov 25.State of the art in paediatric heart transplantation: the Berlin experience.Hetzer R(1), Weng Y, Delmo Walter EM.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin, Berlin, Germany.Enormous progress has been made in paediatric heart transplantation since thefirst unsuccessful effort by Kantrowitz in 1967. Early reports of childrenundergoing heart transplantation showed alarmingly high perioperative mortalityrates of 25-60%, with the diagnosis of congenital heart disease (CHD)representing a particularly high-risk subset compared with cardiomyopathy. Manyof these early failures were related to poor patient selection, suboptimalimmunosuppression and technical problems. We learned a great deal from theseearlier difficulties. Presently, with more refined techniques, better-definedpatient selection criteria, excellent graft rejection monitoring and optimalimmunosuppression, the ISHLT 2011 registry reported a 10-year survival rate of60% for patients transplanted for end-stage CHD and >70% for those transplantedfor cardiomyopathy. The technical dilemmas in complex CHD were overcome bysurgical ingenuity and creativity, innovative solutions and careful surgicalplanning, adapting the complex recipient anatomy to the normal donor anatomy. Theminiaturized Berlin Heart pulsatile ventricular assist devices in children as abridge to transplantation have revolutionized treatment and become a significant contribution in heart-failure therapy. The intramyocardial electrogram andechocardiographic strain rate imaging have been employed as non-invasivetechniques of rejection monitoring. Immunosuppressive drugs have a major impacton the development and progression of cardiac allograft vasculopathy, the maincause of cardiac allograft loss and a leading cause of mortality after the first year post-transplantation. The questions of whether a transplanted heart in anewborn grows to adult size along with the child and whether the dimensionalcardiac growth allows adequate function over time have been largely answered inour previous investigations. As more transplanted children reach adulthood,concerns about their life expectancy when they have reached 10 years of lifepost-transplant are raised, particularly with respect to establishingpartnerships and families, their ability to earn a living and the fulfilment ofpersonal life perspectives. Some heart-transplanted patients requireretransplantation to remain alive. The disparity between the demand for andsupply of donor hearts makes retransplantation an ethical issue. We 'do notrefuse' any patient who needs retransplantation. Mechanical circulatory supportdevices for long-term use are now largely available to accommodate such cases.