: 16824826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1376. Circulation. 2006 Jul 4;114(1 Suppl):I27-32.Marginal cardiac allografts do not have increased primary graft dysfunction inalternate list transplantation.Lima B(1), Rajagopal K, Petersen RP, Shah AS, Soule B, Felker GM, Rogers JG,Lodge AJ, Milano CA.Author information: (1)DUMC Box 3043, Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.BACKGROUND: Clinical success with modern heart transplantation (HT) has led tothe development of an alternate list (AL) HT strategy, matching marginal cardiac allografts with recipients who do not meet standard criteria for HT. Marginalallografts may be at an increased risk for primary graft dysfunction (PGD), theleading cause of early mortality after HT.(1) The incidence of PGD in AL HTrelative to standard list (SL) HT has not been evaluated, and may contribute tothe greater mortality associated with AL HT.(2) The objective of this study wasto determine the incidence of and predictors for PGD.METHODS AND RESULTS: A retrospective analysis was performed on 260 consecutiveadult patients undergoing either SL HT (n=207) or AL HT (n=53) at our institutionfrom 1/2000 to 1/2005. PGD was defined by requirement for mechanical circulatory support immediately post-HT or more broadly as the need for either mechanicalsupport or high-dose inotrope (epinephrine > or = 0.07 microg/kg/min). Donorhearts allocated to AL recipients were turned down for SL HT for reasons thatincluded coronary disease, left ventricular dysfunction or hypertrophy, andhigh-dose inotropic requirement. AL HT recipients were significantly older, with a higher proportion of diabetes mellitus and ischemic cardiomyopathy. Both groupsexperienced a similar incidence of significant rejection, but overall mortalitywas higher in the AL HT group. (2) The incidence of PGD did not differ between ALand SL HT recipients. Pre-transplant VAD and prolonged total ischemic times (> or= 4.5 hours) were independent predictors of PGD.CONCLUSIONS: Select marginal donor hearts used in AL HT do not have an increased incidence of PGD. Pre-transplant VAD and prolonged ischemic times are moreimportant determinants of PGD. These data support continued aggressiveutilization of marginal donor hearts in AL HT.