: 23896769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]385. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2013 Jul;10(4):441-52. doi: 10.1586/17434440.2013.811851.HeartWare miniaturized intrapericardial ventricular assist device: advantages andadverse events in comparison to contemporary devices.Sabashnikov A(1), Mohite PN, Simon AR, Popov AF.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation & Mechanical Circulatory Support,Royal Brompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, Harefield Hospital, Hill EndRoad, Harefield, Middlesex UB9 6JH, UK.Increasing incidence of end-stage heart failure and limited availability of donororgans have led to longer waiting times for cardiac transplantation andsubsequently increasing mortality. Ventricular assist device therapy is fastbecoming an accepted alternative treatment to treat end-stage heart failure andis being implemented as a bridge to decision, bridge to myocardial recovery,bridge to heart transplantation or as a destination therapy. LVADs not onlyenable hemodynamic stabilization and recovery of secondary organ failure inseverely ill patients, but have also been shown to reduce pulmonary vascularresistance in nontransplantable candidates. Technology of ventricular assistdevices has evolved over several decades of time and generations of devices. The HVAD® Pump (HeartWare International, Inc., MA, USA) is a third-generation,miniaturized, continuous-flow ventricular assist device. Due to its miniaturized housing and intrapericardial placing, it can be used proficiently to support the right ventricle and has also demonstrated great utility in minimally invasive andoff-pump implantation, exchange and explantation. It is favored for similarreasons in adolescents and in heart failure due to complex congenital heartdisease. The purpose of this article is to review the clinical use of HeartWare® Ventricular Assist System (HeartWare System; HeartWare International, Inc.) with different strategies pertaining to its advantages and adverse events incomparison with contemporary devices.