: 17996819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1253. Ann Thorac Surg. 2007 Nov;84(5):1699-703.Ambulatory oxygenator right ventricular assist device for total right heart andrespiratory support.Wang D(1), Lick SD, Zhou X, Liu X, Benkowski RJ, Zwischenberger JB.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0298, USA.BACKGROUND: Our goal is ambulatory total respiratory and right heart assistanceallowing a bridge to lung transplant. To that end, we have coupled a compactparacorporeal gas exchange device with a right ventricular assist device (RVAD)to create an "OxyRVAD."METHODS: Through a limited left thoracotomy, the main pulmonary artery (PA) andright atrium (RA) were exposed in 5 anesthetized sheep. After a systemic heparin bolus, a 12-mm outer diameter crimped graft glued to tubing was anastomosed (end to side) to the main PA and a VAD atrial cannula was placed through the RAappendage. The chest was drained and closed, then the PA graft flowed at 1 to 2L/min as a shunt to the RA overnight. The next day, the animal wasreanticoagulated, and the shunt cannulae clamped and divided. The OxyRVAD unit,consisting of commercially available components including an axial flow pump and low-resistance cardiopulmonary bypass gas exchange device, was interposed.Pumping from RA to PA was maintained at 3 L/min.RESULTS: Five consecutive sheep survived the implant, and stood and ate normally after initiation of the OxyRVAD. Three survived the full 2-week study, and afourth was sacrificed on day 13 owing to a storm-related power failure. For these4 sheep, pump flow was stable at 3 L/min. Carbon dioxide removal was constant andtotal during the experiment at 200 +/- 19 mL/min. Oxygen transfer was 144 +/- 44 mL/min. One sheep had progressive thrombocytopenia and was sacrificed on day 5after implant.CONCLUSIONS: Our ambulatory OxyRVAD can provide total assistance for the rightheart and lungs in normal awake sheep for 14 days.