: 23842614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]398. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2014 Sep-Oct;29(5):405-15. doi: 10.1097/JCN.0b013e318299fa09.Background and design of the profiling biobehavioral responses to mechanicalsupport in advanced heart failure study.Lee CS(1), Mudd JO, Gelow JM, Nguyen T, Hiatt SO, Green JK, Denfeld QE, BidwellJT, Grady KL.Author information: (1)Christopher S. Lee, PhD, RN, FAHA Associate Professor, Schools of Nursing and Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland. James O. Mudd, MDAssistant Professor, Director of Heart Failure/Transplant Cardiology, School ofMedicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland. Jill M. Gelow, MD, MPHAssistant Professor, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University,Portland. Thuan Nguyen, MD, PhD Assistant Professor, School of Medicine, OregonHealth & Science University, Portland. Shirin O. Hiatt, MPH, MS, RN ResearchProject Director, School of Nursing, Oregon Health & Science University,Portland. Jennifer K. Green, MS Research Associate, School of Nursing, OregonHealth & Science University, Portland. Quin E. Denfeld, BSN, RN, CCRN ResearchAssociate, School of Nursing, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland. JulieT. Bidwell, BSN, RN Research Associate, School of Nursing, Oregon Health &Science University, Portland. Kathleen L. Grady, PhD, APN, FAHA, FAAN AssociateProfessor, Administrative Director, Center for Heart Failure, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.BACKGROUND: Unexplained heterogeneity in response to ventricular assist device(VAD) implantation for the management of advanced heart failure impedes ourability to predict favorable outcomes, provide adequate patient and familyeducation, and personalize monitoring and symptom management strategies. Thepurpose of this article was to describe the background and the design of a study entitled "Profiling Biobehavioral Responses to Mechanical Support in AdvancedHeart Failure" (PREMISE).STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: PREMISE is a prospective cohort study designed to (1)identify common and distinct trajectories of change in physical and psychologicalsymptom burden; (2) characterize common trajectories of change in serumbiomarkers of myocardial stress, systemic inflammation, and endothelialdysfunction; and (3) quantify associations between symptoms and biomarkers ofpathogenesis in adults undergoing VAD implantation. Latent growth mixturemodeling, including parallel process and cross-classification modeling, will beused to address the study aims and will entail identifying trajectories,quantifying associations between trajectories and both clinical andquality-of-life outcomes, and identifying predictors of favorable symptom andbiomarker responses to VAD implantation.CONCLUSIONS: Research findings from the PREMISE study will be used to enhanceshared patient and provider decision making and to shape a much-needed new breed of interventions and clinical management strategies that are tailored todifferential symptom and pathogenic responses to VAD implantation.PMCID: PMC3885612 [Available on 2015-09-01]