: 8947442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1946. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1996 Nov;10 Suppl 2:617-22.Medical treatment of end-stage heart failure.Binetti G(1), Senni M, Colombo F, Tasca G, Mamprin F, Caporale R, Ferrazzi P,Gamba A, Glauber M, Troise G, Fiocchi R.Author information: (1)Heart Failure and Transplant Program, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy.Congestive heart failure is a lethal condition that affects an increasing number of patients. In recent years a great amount of data have accumulated on thepathophysiology and medical and surgical therapy of this condition. In spite ofthe advances in its management and the great number of patients affected, common errors are still made by internists and cardiologists in the use of drugs andtherapeutic strategies. Digitalis has only recently been shown to affecthemodynamics, exercise capacity, and clinical symptoms, but the effects onsurvival still have to be demonstrated. Loop diuretics, eventually combined with thiazides and antialdosterone drugs in patients with clinical signs and symptoms of fluid retention, are the mainstays of therapy of congestive heart failure. In order to make diuretic therapy efficacious, moderate salt and water intakerestriction is mandatory. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are now considered unavoidable drugs in the management of heart failure, and an attemptto reach the doses that have been shown to be efficacious for survival in thelarge trials has to be made in every patient with this condition. Othervasodilators, such as hydralazine and nitrates, which show a less pronouncedeffect on survival but more effective hemodynamic actions than ACE inhibitors,may be used to control mitral insufficiency or to improve hemodynamics in verysick patients. Hemodynamic instability refractory to increasing doses ofvasodilators and diuretics is a severe condition that requires hospital admissionto administer drugs parenterally. These patients are usually treated with thecombination of catecholamines and phosphodiesterase inhibitors associated withintravenous diuretics until clinical stability is again achieved and oral therapyis resumed and restructured. The use of aggressive pharmacological therapy andphosphodiesterase inhibitors has reduced the need for assisted circulatorysupport in these patients. Beta-blockers have shown promising results whenadministered to patients with heart failure, although a definitive demonstration of their effects on survival is still lacking. Other additional measures thatneed to be considered in patients with end-stage congestive heart failure are theuse of antiarrhythmic drugs and anticoagulation.