: 22995552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]564. Circulation. 2012 Sep 11;126(11 Suppl 1):S9-19.Pre-explant stability of unloading-promoted cardiac improvement predicts outcome after weaning from ventricular assist devices.Dandel M(1), Weng Y, Siniawski H, Potapov E, Krabatsch T, Lehmkuhl HB, Drews T,Knosalla C, Hetzer R.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin, Germany. dandel@dhzb.deBACKGROUND: Detection of cardiac recovery that allows long-term cardiac stabilityafter ventricular assist device (VAD) explantation is a major goal. Afternormalization of ventricular diameters during unloading, the pre-explant leftventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) allows the detection of patients with thepotential to remain stable after VAD explantation. However, some patients withLVEF >45 before VAD explantation show early recurrence of heart failure (HF). We aimed to find out if unstable improvement can be recognized before VADexplantation.METHODS AND RESULTS: Among 96 patients weaned from VADs since 1995, a relatively homogenous group of 53 patients with nonischemic chronic cardiomyopathy (CCM) wasselected for the study. The pre-explant stability of major parameters of LVfunction, size, and geometry that were measured by echocardiography during serial"off-pump" trials was tested for relationship with cardiac stability after VADexplantation. LVEF, systolic peak wall motion velocity (Sm), end-diastolicdiameter (LVEDD), end-diastolic relative wall thickness (RWT(ED)) andend-diastolic short/long-axis ratio (S/L(ED)) were selected for evaluation. Inpostweaning unstable patients, the selected parameters showed relevantinstability already before VAD explantation during the time period between bestcardiac improvement and VAD explantation and also during the final off-pump trialjust before VAD explantation. For all parameters, there were significantdifferences (P<0.05) in pre-explant changes between patients with and withoutpostweaning cardiac stability. Using the optimal cutoff values obtained fromreceiver-operating characteristic analysis, we found for our selected parameters predictive values for postexplant cardiac stability of ≥1 year, ≥3 years, and ≥5 years, ranging between 94 and 100, 92, and 100, and 78 and 100, respectively.Using for all parameter changes the cutoff value of 10, we found similarpredictive values for cardiac stability of ≥1 year, ≥3 years, and ≥5 years,ranging between 93 and 97, 90 and 96, and 83 and 92, respectively.CONCLUSIONS: Our results strongly suggest the possibility to improve theprediction of postexplant transplant/VAD-free outcome in CCM patients withcardiac improvement during VAD support by analyzing the pre-explant stability of several LV off-pump echocardiographic parameters during serial off-pump trials.