: 18204310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1240. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2008 Jan;27(1):112-5. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2007.10.010.Connecting the Centrimag Levitronix pump to Berlin Heart Excor cannulae; a newapproach to bridge to bridge.Maat AP(1), van Thiel RJ, Dalinghaus M, Bogers AJ.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Erasmus Medical Center, Gravendijkwal230 3015 CE Rotterdam, The Netherlands. a.p.w.m.maat@erasmusmc.nlBACKGROUND: An increasing number of children are requiring circulatory support.Hospitals offering pediatric Ventricular Assist Device (VAD) should have devices of different sizes available to cover the full range of patient sizes incurringconsiderable expense. As in adults, post-operative bleeding often complicates VADimplantation. The use of a Levitronix Centrimag centrifugal pump, connected toBerlin Heart Excor cannulae, seems an attractive and logic combination, both interms of patient safety and of hospital economics.METHODS: We describe 3 children with therapy resistant cardiac failure whounderwent extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) as a rescue beforeproceeding to placement of the Berlin Heart Excor paracorporeal assist device.The Levitronix Centrimag pump was used as an intermediate device to allow thepatients to be stabilised. Therefore, only Berlin Heart cannulae of differentsizes have to be readily available; if successful stabilization can be achieved, the Berlin Heart Excor ventricles and the drive unit can then be ordered toreplace the Levitronix pump.RESULTS: Two patients were successfully stabilised with the Levitronix pump andwere switched to the definitive Berlin Heart Excor ventricles after 6 days ofsupport. The third child succumbed due to intractable pulmonary hemorrhage inseverely damaged lungs. No device related complications, especially nothrombo-embolic events, occurred during Levitronix support.CONCLUSION: The Levitronix Centrimag pump was easy to handle and gave effectivecirculatory support, the patients were only switched to the Berlin Heart Excorsystem after stabilization. In patients with a high risk of failure, it is arelatively cheap but safe and effective support system.