: 18406621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1220. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2008 Jun-Jul;97(2-3):479-96. doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2008.02.002. Epub 2008 Feb 12.Impact of left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support on the cardiac reverseremodeling process.Klotz S(1), Jan Danser AH, Burkhoff D.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University HospitalMuenster, Albert-Schweitzer-Str. 33, Muenster, Germany.Stefan.Klotz@ukmuenster.deWith improved technology and expanding indications for use, left ventricularassist devices (LVADs) are assuming a greater role in the care of patients withend-stage heart failure. Following LVAD implantation with the intention of bridgeto transplant, it became evident that some patients exhibit substantial recovery of ventricular function. This prompted explantation of some devices in lieu oftransplantation, the so-called bridge-to-recovery (BTR) therapy. However,clinical outcomes following these experiences are not always successful. Patientstreated in this fashion have often progressed rapidly back to heart failure.Special knowledge has emerged from studies of hearts supported by LVADs thatprovides insights into the basic mechanisms of ventricular remodeling andpossible limits of ventricular recovery. In general, it was these studies thatspawned the concept of reverse remodeling now recognized as an important goal of many heart failure treatments. Important examples of myocardial and/orventricular properties that do not regress towards normal during LVAD supportinclude abnormal extracellular matrix metabolism, increased tissue angiotensinlevels, myocardial stiffening and partial recovery of gene expression involvedwith metabolism. Nevertheless, studies of LVAD-heart interactions have led to theunderstanding that although we once considered the end-stage failing heart ofpatients near death to be irreversibly diseased, an unprecedented degree ofmyocardial recovery is possible, when given sufficient mechanical unloading andrestoration of more normal neurohormonal milieu. Evidence supporting andunsupporting the notion of reverse remodeling and clinical implications of thisprocess will be reviewed.