: 16156313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1446. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005 Sep;130(3):699-704.Who would be a candidate for bridge to recovery during prolonged mechanical left ventricular support in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy?Matsumiya G(1), Monta O, Fukushima N, Sawa Y, Funatsu T, Toda K, Matsuda H.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Osaka UniversityGraduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan. matsumg@surg1.med.osaka-u.ac.jpOBJECTIVES: We sought to elucidate the incidence and timing of myocardialrecovery in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy during prolongedsupport with a left ventricular assist system and to characterize the factorsinfluencing this phenomenon.METHODS: Since 2000, 11 patients (mean age, 27.9 years) with end-stage heartfailure caused by dilated cardiomyopathy were supported with a left ventricularassist system for more than 6 months. All patients had aggressive pharmacologictreatment, including beta-blockers, together with unloading by means of a leftventricular assist system.RESULTS: During 239 to 663 days (mean, 453 days) of left ventricular assistsystem support, 5 patients had significant recovery of cardiac function andsuccessfully underwent left ventricular assist system removal. All of thesepatients have remained in New York Heart Association class 1 during 8 to 29months of follow-up. The improvement of left ventricular function started atvarious times. In particular, 2 of 5 recovered patients started to showimprovement after 1 year of left ventricular assist system support. Themyocardial fibrosis did not resolve but rather worsened in all patients duringleft ventricular assist system support. However, myocardial fibrosis was lesssevere in the recovered group (17.7% +/- 8.2% at left ventricular assist systemimplantation vs 20.1% +/- 5.2% at explantation) in comparison with that in thenonrecovered group (30.5% +/- 13.2% vs 48.4% +/- 5.1%) both before and after use of the left ventricular assist system.CONCLUSION: Patients with severe congestive heart failure caused by dilatedcardiomyopathy have a good chance of myocardial recovery and successfulexplantation of the left ventricular assist system. A relatively slow response ofmyocardial recovery during prolonged left ventricular assist system support wasdemonstrated in some patients. A lesser degree of fibrotic changes in the leftventricle was predictive of recovery.