: 10475473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1845. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999 Aug;68(2):688-94.100 long-term implantable left ventricular assist devices: the ColumbiaPresbyterian interim experience.Sun BC(1), Catanese KA, Spanier TB, Flannery MR, Gardocki MT, Marcus LS, LevinHR, Rose EA, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, NewYork, USA. bcsun@psghs.eduBACKGROUND: The use of left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) as bridge totransplantation is now accepted as a standard of care for a subset of end-stageheart failure patients. Our interim experience with both pneumatically andelectrically powered ThermoCardiosystems LVADs is presented to outline thebenefits and limitations of device support as well as discuss its potential role as bridge to recovery and as destination therapy.METHODS AND RESULTS: Detailed records were kept prospectively for all patientsundergoing LVAD insertion. One hundred LVADs were inserted over 7 years into 95patients, with an overall survival rate of 75% and a transplantation rate of 70%.Four patients underwent device explant for recovered myocardial function. Threepatients received LVADs as destination therapy in the ongoing REMATCH (RandomizedEvaluation of Mechanical Assist Treatment for Congestive Heart failure) trial.Overall mean patient age was 51 years, and mean duration of support was 108 days.There were 25 device-related infections including the drive line, device pocket, and blood-contacting surfaces. Cerebral vascular accidents and other embolicevents occurred in 7 patients with six deaths. There were four devicemalfunctions and nine graft-related hemorrhages, resulting in six reoperationsand three deaths.CONCLUSIONS: The use of long-term implantable LVADs will likely not be limited tobridge to transplantation. The REMATCH trial has commenced to study the roleLVADs may have as an alternative to medical management. Furthermore, as theissues of myocardial recovery are examined, the "bridge to recovery" may be animportant additional role for these assist devices.