: 23498822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]473. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013 Apr;32(4):424-30. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2012.12.010.Speckle tracking echocardiography as a new technique to evaluate rightventricular function in patients with left ventricular assist device therapy.Cameli M(1), Lisi M, Righini FM, Focardi M, Lunghetti S, Bernazzali S, Marchetti L, Biagioli B, Galderisi M, Maccherini M, Sani G, Mondillo S.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, University of Siena, Italy.cameli@cheapnet.itBACKGROUND: Right ventricular (RV) systolic function has a critical role indetermining the clinical outcome and the success of using left ventricular assistdevices (LVADs) in patients with refractory heart failure. RV deformationanalysis by speckle tracking echocardiography (STE) has recently allowed a deeperanalysis of RV longitudinal function. The aim of the study was to observe RVfunction by STE in patients with advanced heart failure before and after LVADimplantation.METHODS: Transthoracic echo Doppler was performed in 10 patients referred forLVAD therapy at baseline and with serial echocardiograms after LVAD implantation.In a sub-group of 4 patients, an echocardiographic evaluation was also made afterintra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) support was initiated and before LVADimplantation. All echocardiographic images were analyzed off-line to calculatethe free wall RV longitudinal strain (RVLS).RESULTS: Three patients who presented the lowest free wall RVLS values atbaseline, showed a progressive decline of RVLS after LVAD implant, presentingfinally RV failure; however, patients with higher values of RVLS at baselinepresented a further and overt increase of strain values in the course offollow-up. The overall performance for the prediction of RV failure after LVADimplant was greatest for free wall RVLS (area under the curve, 0.93). For thesub-group receiving the IABP as an intermediate step, only 2 patients with anincrease of RVLS after IABP implantation also showed an increase of RVLS levels, after subsequent LVAD implantation. The 2 patients without an increase of RVLSafter IABP implantation also presented with RV failure after LVAD therapy.CONCLUSIONS: This study of 10 patients indicates that the new parameter of RVLS, representing RV myocardial deformation, may have important clinical implications for the selection and management of LVAD patients. A large multicenter study isrequired to confirm these observations and to quantify the clinical significance of changes in RVLS value.Copyright © 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.