: 11166612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1770. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000 Dec;70(6):1977-84; discussion 1984-5.Assessment of an extracorporeal life support to LVAD bridge to heart transplantstrategy.Pagani FD(1), Aaronson KD, Dyke DB, Wright S, Swaniker F, Bartlett RH.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109, USA.fpagani@umich.eduBACKGROUND: Extracorporeal life support (ECLS) is an effective technique forproviding emergent circulatory assistance. However, its use in adult patients is associated with poor survival when myocardial function fails to recover. Due tothe prolonged waiting times for heart transplantation, ECLS as a bridge totransplant is associated with poor survival. In addition, ECLS has been reported to be a significant risk factor for death after bridging to an implantable leftventricular assist device (LVAD). After acquisition of the HeartMate LVAD (ThermoCardiosystems, Inc) in October 1996, we began using ECLS as a bridge to animplantable LVAD and subsequently transplantation in selected high-risk patients.METHODS: From October 1, 1996 to December 1, 1999, 60 adult patients presentingwith cardiogenic shock were evaluated for circulatory assistance.RESULTS: Twenty-five patients (group 1) with cardiac arrest or severe hemodynamicinstability and multiorgan failure were placed on ECLS. Eight patients survivedto LVAD implant, 1 was bridged directly to transplant, and 4 weaned from ECLS.Nine patients in group 1 survived to discharge. Thirty patients (group 2)underwent LVAD implant without ECLS. Twenty-three were bridged to transplant,with 22 surviving to discharge. Five patients (group 3) were placed onextracorporeal ventricular assist with 3 bridged to transplant and all surviving to discharge. One-year actuarial survival from the initiation of circulatorysupport was 36% (group 1), 73% (group 2), and 60% (group 3). One-year actuarialsurvival from the time of LVAD implant in group 1, conditional on surviving ECLS,was 75% (p = NS compared with group 2).CONCLUSIONS: In selected high-risk patients, LVAD survival after initial ECLS wasnot different from survival after LVAD support alone. An initial period ofresuscitation with ECLS is an effective strategy to salvage patients with cardiacarrest or extreme hemodynamic instability and multiorgan injury.