: 16322705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1426. ASAIO J. 2005 Sep-Oct;51(5):495-7.Heart transplantation in children after mechanical circulatory support:comparison of heart transplantation with ventricular assist devices and elective heart transplantation.Coskun O(1), Parsa A, Weitkemper H, Blanz U, Coskun T, Sandica E, Tenderich G,El-Banayosy A, Minami K, Körfer R.Author information: (1)Heart-Center of North-Rhine Westphalia, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Bad Oeynhausen Germany.Heart transplantation (HTx) is an ultimate treatment for children with end-stage heart failure or inoperable congenital heart disease. The supply of hearts isinadequate; therefore, different mechanical support systems must be used asbridge to HTx in pediatric patients with postoperative low output. The use ofventricular assist devices (VADs) as bridge to HTx in children is limited becauseof size differences. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the overalllong-term outcome of pediatric circulatory support before pediatric HTx. From1989 through 2004, 91 pediatric patients underwent isolated HTx. Seven of themrequired mechanical support before transplantation. We reviewed retrospectivelythe course of 91 children (mean age 14.7 years) who underwent HTx. Group Aconsisted of elective HTx patients who were treated as outpatients before HTx,whereas group B was the VAD-HTx bridging group (n=7; mean age 12.31 +/- 2.8years). Mean duration of VAD support was 108 +/- 98 days (minimum 1 day, maximum 258 days). Overall survival rate after HTx was 80% at 1 year without significant differences between groups. Five of seven patients survived and could bedischarged after successful HTx, for a survival rate of 77%. The mean follow-upperiod was 16.76 +/- 10.6 months. No differences in posttransplantation long-termsurvival and rejection episodes occurred between patients transplanted with orwithout VAD. VAD therapy can keep pediatric patients with end-stage heart failurealive until successful HTx, and bridge to HTx is a safe procedure in pediatricpatients. After HTx, survival rates of these children are similar to those ofpatients awaiting elective HTx.