: 24814839  [PubMed - in process]189. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015 Mar;47(3):497-504. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezu183. Epub 2014 May 7.Preoperative liver dysfunction influences blood product administration andalterations in circulating haemostatic markers following ventricular assistdevice implantation.Woolley JR(1), Kormos RL(2), Teuteberg JJ(3), Bermudez CA(4), Bhama JK(4),Lockard KL(3), Kunz NM(3), Wagner WR(5).Author information: (1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USAMcGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,Pittsburgh, PA, USA The Heart and Vascular Institute, University of PittsburghMedical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (2)McGowan Institute for RegenerativeMedicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA The Heart and VascularInstitute, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USADepartment of Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,USA. (3)The Heart and Vascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh MedicalCenter, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (4)The Heart and Vascular Institute, University ofPittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Department of CardiovascularSurgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (5)Department ofBioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA McGowan Institutefor Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USADepartment of Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,USA wagnerwr@upmc.edu.OBJECTIVES: Preoperative liver dysfunction may influence haemostasis followingventricular assist device (VAD) implantation. The Model for End-stage LiverDisease (MELD) score was assessed as a predictor of bleeding and levels ofhaemostatic markers in patients with currently utilized VADs.METHODS: Sixty-three patients (31 HeartMate II, 15 HeartWare, 17 Thoratecparacorporeal ventricular assist device) implanted 2001-11 were analysed forpreoperative liver dysfunction (MELD) and blood product administration. Of these patients, 21 had additional blood drawn to measure haemostatic marker levels.Cohorts were defined based on high (≥18.0, n = 7) and low (<18.0, n = 14)preoperative MELD scores.RESULTS: MELD score was positively correlated with postoperative administrationof red blood cell (RBC), platelet, plasma and total blood product units (TBPU) , as well as chest tube drainage and cardiopulmonary bypass time. Age and MELD werepreoperative predictors of TBPU by multivariate analysis. The high-MELD cohorthad higher administration of TBPU, RBC and platelet units and chest tube drainagepostimplant. Similarly, patients who experienced at least one bleeding adverseevent were more likely to have had a high preoperative MELD. The high-MELD group exhibited different temporal trends in F1 + 2 levels and platelet counts topostoperative day (POD) 55. D-dimer levels in high-MELD patients became elevated versus those for low-MELD patients on POD 55.CONCLUSIONS: Preoperative MELD score predicts postoperative bleeding incontemporary VADs. Preoperative liver dysfunction may also alter postoperativesubclinical haemostasis through different temporal trends of thrombin generation and platelet counts, as well as protracted fibrinolysis.© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.