: 23570742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]462. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013 Apr 8;2(2):e000016. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000016.Mechanical unloading activates FoxO3 to trigger Bnip3-dependent cardiomyocyteatrophy.Cao DJ(1), Jiang N, Blagg A, Johnstone JL, Gondalia R, Oh M, Luo X, Yang KC,Shelton JM, Rothermel BA, Gillette TG, Dorn GW, Hill JA.Author information: (1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern MedicalCenter, Dallas, TX 75390-8573, USA.BACKGROUND: Mechanical assist device therapy has emerged recently as an importantand rapidly expanding therapy in advanced heart failure, triggering in somepatients a beneficial reverse remodeling response. However, mechanisms underlyingthis benefit are unclear.METHODS AND RESULTS: In a model of mechanical unloading of the left ventricle, weobserved progressive myocyte atrophy, autophagy, and robust activation of thetranscription factor FoxO3, an established regulator of catabolic processes inother cell types. Evidence for FoxO3 activation was similarly detected inunloaded failing human myocardium. To determine the role of FoxO3 activation incardiac muscle in vivo, we engineered transgenic mice harboring acardiomyocyte-specific constitutively active FoxO3 mutant(caFoxO3(flox);αMHC-Mer-Cre-Mer). Expression of caFoxO3 triggered dramatic andprogressive loss of cardiac mass, robust increases in cardiomyocyte autophagy,declines in mitochondrial biomass and function, and early mortality. Whereasincreases in cardiomyocyte apoptosis were not apparent, we detected robustincreases in Bnip3 (Bcl2/adenovirus E1B 19-kDa interacting protein 3), anestablished downstream target of FoxO3. To test the role of Bnip3, we crossed thecaFoxO3(flox);αMHC-Mer-Cre-Mer mice with Bnip3-null animals. Remarkably, theatrophy and autophagy phenotypes were significantly blunted, yet the earlymortality triggered by FoxO3 activation persisted. Rather, declines in cardiacperformance were attenuated by proteasome inhibitors. Consistent with involvementof FoxO3-driven activation of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, we detectedtime-dependent activation of the atrogenes program and sarcomere proteinbreakdown.CONCLUSIONS: In aggregate, these data point to FoxO3, a protein activated bymechanical unloading, as a master regulator that governs both theautophagy-lysosomal and ubiquitin-proteasomal pathways to orchestrate cardiacmuscle atrophy.PMCID: PMC3647287