: 25175547  [PubMed - in process]122. Int J Cardiol. 2014 Oct 20;176(3):828-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2014.08.012. Epub2014 Aug 8.Novel techniques of mechanical circulatory support for the right heart and Fontancirculation.Derk G(1), Laks H(2), Biniwale R(2), Patel S(2), De LaCruz K(3), Mazor E(4),Williams R(5), Valdovinos J(6), Levi DS(7), Reardon L(8), Aboulhosn J(8).Author information: (1)Ahmanson/UCLA Adult Congenital Heart Disease Center, UCLA Division ofCardiology, United States; UCLA Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, United States.Electronic address: grderk@gmail.com. (2)UCLA Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, United States. (3)UCLA Cardiac Perfusion Services, United States. (4)UCLAAnesthesiology Department, United States. (5)Ahmanson/UCLA Adult Congenital HeartDisease Center, UCLA Division of Cardiology, United States. (6)UCLABioengineering Department, United States. (7)UCLA Division of PediatricCardiology, United States. (8)Ahmanson/UCLA Adult Congenital Heart DiseaseCenter, UCLA Division of Cardiology, United States; UCLA Division of PediatricCardiology, United States.BACKGROUND: Currently available ventricular assist devices are designed primarilyfor use in patients with left sided heart failure. This study evaluated theefficacy of the Jarvik 2000 ventricular assist device (VAD) as a pulmonary pumpto power a Fontan circuit in a large animal model.METHODS: Without the use of cardiopulmonary bypass, Fontan circulations weresurgically created in 4 pigs (50 kg) using synthetic grafts from the inferior andsuperior vena cavas to the main pulmonary artery. Subsequently, the VAD wasimplanted within the common Fontan graft to provide a pulmonary pump. Directchamber pressures and epicardial Doppler images were taken during the variousphases of the experiment. Heart rate, femoral artery blood pressure, oxygensaturation, and aortic flow rate were continuously recorded. The outflow cannula of the VAD was then partially banded by 50% and then 75% to mimic increasedafterload.RESULTS: Fontan and VAD implantation was successfully performed in all 4 animals.Arterial pressure and aortic flow decreased dramatically with institution of the Fontan but were restored to baseline upon activation of the VAD. The pressurewithin the systemic venous circulation rose precipitously with institution of theFontan circulation and improved appropriately with activation of the VAD.Adequate perfusion was maintained during increased afterload.CONCLUSIONS: An axial flow VAD can restore normal hemodynamics and cardiac outputwhen used as a pulmonary pump in a Fontan circulation. A VAD can rescue a failingFontan as a bridge to transplant or recovery, even in the setting of highpulmonary resistance.Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.