: 10523475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1836. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 1999 Sep 3;111(16):629-35.[The DeBakey VAD axial flow pump: first clinical experience with a new generationof implantable, nonpulsatile blood pumps for long-term support prior totransplantation].[Article in German]Wieselthaler GM(1), Schima H, Lassnigg A, Pacher R, Ovsenk T, Laufer G, Noon GP, DeBakey ME, Wolner E.Author information: (1)Abteilung f체r Herz-Thoraxchirurgie, Universit채tsklinik f체r Chirurgic, AKHWien, Ludwig-Boltzmann-Institut f체r herzchirurgische Forschung, Osterreich.georg.wieselthaler@akh-wien.ac.atBecause of the high frequency of acute hemodynamic deterioration in patientsawaiting cardiac transplantation, mechanical techniques of circulatory support tobridge the period until transplantation have become a standard clinicalprocedure. Continuous-flow rotary blood pumps offer exciting new perspectives in terms of ventricular assistance and/or as a total cardiac substitute. A DeBakeyVAD axial flow pump was implanted in two male patients (aged 44 and 65 years,respectively) suffering from end-stage left heart failure. In the initialpostoperative period the mean flow rate of the pump was 3.9 +/- 0.5 l/min. Inboth patients, the early postoperative phase was characterised by a completelynon-pulsatile flow profile. Two weeks after implantation and partial recovery of the natural left ventricle, increasing pulse pressures became evident and netflow increased to 4.5 +/- 0.6 l/min. Patients were mobilised and made to under-goregular physical training. Hemolysis produced by the pump was low while freehaemoglobin stayed in physiological ranges, increasing only slightly from 2.1 +/-0.8 mg/dl preoperatively to 3.0 +/- 1.5 mg/dl ten weeks after implantation. Onepatient was successfully transplanted on day 74 after implantation of the DeBakeyVAD while the second patient is, after 110 days of pumping, still waiting fortransplantation. This first experience concerning clinical implantation of theDeBakey VAD axial flow pump showed that the device is promising as a means ofproviding mechanical support to bridge the period until cardiac transplantation.