: 20044278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1013. Ont Health Technol Assess Ser. 2010;10(5):1-47. Epub 2010 Apr 1.Extracorporeal lung support technologies - bridge to recovery and bridge to lung transplantation in adult patients: an evidence-based analysis.Health Quality Ontario.For cases of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and progressive chronicrespiratory failure, the first choice or treatment is mechanical ventilation. Fordecades, this method has been used to support critically ill patients inrespiratory failure. Despite its life-saving potential, however, severalexperimental and clinical studies have suggested that ventilator-induced lunginjury can adversely affect the lungs and patient outcomes. Current opinion isthat by reducing the pressure and volume of gas delivered to the lungs duringmechanical ventilation, the stress applied to the lungs is eased, enabling themto rest and recover. In addition, mechanical ventilation may fail to provideadequate gas exchange, thus patients may suffer from severe hypoxia andhypercapnea. For these reasons, extracorporeal lung support technologies may playan important role in the clinical management of patients with lung failure,allowing not only the transfer of oxygen and carbon dioxide (CO(2)) but alsobuying the lungs the time needed to rest and heal.OBJECTIVE: The objective ofthis analysis was to assess the effectiveness, safety, and cost-effectiveness of extracorporeal lung support technologies in the improvement of pulmonary gasexchange and the survival of adult patients with acute pulmonary failure andthose with end-stage chronic progressive lung disease as a bridge to lungtransplantation (LTx). The application of these technologies in primary graftdysfunction (PGD) after LTx is beyond the scope of this review and is notdiscussed. CLINICAL APPLICATIONS OF EXTRACORPOREAL LUNG SUPPORT: Extracorporeallung support technologies [i.e., Interventional Lung Assist (ILA) andextracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)] have been advocated for use in thetreatment of patients with respiratory failure. These techniques do not treat theunderlying lung condition; rather, they improve gas exchange while enabling theimplantation of a protective ventilation strategy to prevent further damage tothe lung tissues imposed by the ventilator. As such, extracorporeal lung support technologies have been used in three major lung failure case types: As a bridgeto recovery in acute lung failure - for patients with injured or diseased lungsto give their lungs time to heal and regain normal physiologic function.As abridge to LTx - for patients with irreversible end stage lung disease requiringLTx.As a bridge to recovery after LTx - used as lung support for patients withPGD or severe hypoxemia. EX-VIVO LUNG PERFUSION AND ASSESSMENT: Recently, theevaluation and reconditioning of donor lungs ex-vivo has been introduced intoclinical practice as a method of improving the rate of donor lung utilization.Generally, about 15% to 20% of donor lungs are suitable for LTx, but thesefigures may increase with the use of ex-vivo lung perfusion. The ex-vivoevaluation and reconditioning of donor lungs is currently performed at theToronto General Hospital (TGH) and preliminary results have been encouraging(Personal communication, clinical expert, December 17, 2009). If itseffectiveness is confirmed, the use of the technique could lead to furtherexpansion of donor organ pools and improvements in post-LTx outcomes.EXTRACORPOREAL LUNG SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES: ECMO: The ECMO system consists of acentrifugal pump, a membrane oxygenator, inlet and outlet cannulas, and tubing.The exchange of oxygen and CO(2) then takes place in the oxygenator, whichdelivers the reoxygenated blood back into one of the patient's veins or arteries.Additional ports may be added for haemodialysis or ultrafiltration. TWO DIFFERENTTECHNIQUES MAY BE USED TO INTRODUCE ECMO: venoarterial and venovenous. In thevenoarterial technique, cannulation is through either the femoral artery and the femoral vein, or through the carotid artery and the internal jugular vein. In thevenovenous technique cannulation is through both femoral veins or a femoral vein and internal jugular vein; one cannula acts as inflow or arterial line, and theother as an outflow or venous line. Venovenous ECMO will not provide adequatesupport if a patient has pulmonary hypertension or right heart failure. Problems associated with cannulation during the procedure include bleeding around thecannulation site and limb ischemia distal to the cannulation site. ILA:Interventional Lung Assist (ILA) is used to remove excess CO(2) from the blood ofpatients in respiratory failure. The system is characterized by a novel,low-resistance gas exchange device with a diffusion membrane composed ofpolymethylpentene (PMP) fibres. These fibres are woven into a complexconfiguration that maximizes the exchange of oxygen and CO(2) by simplediffusion. The system is also designed to operate without the help of an externalpump, though one can be added if higher blood flow is required. The device isthen applied across an arteriovenous shunt between the femoral artery and femoralvein. Depending on the size of the arterial cannula used and the mean systemicarterial pressure, a blood flow of up to 2.5 L/min can be achieved (up to 5.5L/min with an external pump). The cannulation is performed after intravenousadministration of heparin. Recently, the first commercially availableextracorporeal membrane ventilator (NovaLung GmbH, Hechingen, Germany) wasapproved for clinical use by Health Canada for patients in respiratory failure.The system has been used in more than 2,000 patients with various indications in Europe, and was used for the first time in North America at the Toronto GeneralHospital in 2006. EVIDENCE-BASED ANALYSIS: The research questions addressed inthis report are: Does ILA/ECMO facilitate gas exchange in the lungs of patientswith severe respiratory failure?Does ILA/ECMO improve the survival rate ofpatients with respiratory failure caused by a range of underlying conditionsincluding patients awaiting LTx?What are the possible serious adverse eventsassociated with ILA/ECMO therapy?To address these questions, a systematicliterature search was performed on September 28, 2009 using OVID MEDLINE, MEDLINEIn-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations, EMBASE, the Cumulative Index toNursing & Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), the Cochrane Library, and theInternational Agency for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA) for studiespublished from January 1, 2005 to September 28, 2008. Abstracts were reviewed by a single reviewer and, for those studies meeting the eligibility criteria,full-text articles were obtained. Reference lists were also examined for anyadditional relevant studies not identified through the search. Articles with anunknown eligibility were reviewed with a second clinical epidemiologist and then a group of epidemiologists until consensus was established.INCLUSION CRITERIA: Studies in which ILA/ECMO was used as a bridge to recovery orbridge to LTxStudies containing information relevant to the effectiveness andsafety of the procedureStudies including at least five patientsEXCLUSION CRITERIA: Studies reporting the use of ILA/ECMO for inter-hospitaltransfers of critically ill patientsStudies reporting the use of ILA/ECMO inpatients during or after LTxAnimal or laboratory studiesCase reportsOUTCOMES OF INTEREST: Reduction in partial pressure of CO(2)Correction ofrespiratory acidosisImprovement in partial pressure of oxygenImprovement inpatient survivalFrequency and severity of adverse eventsThe search yielded 107citations in Medline and 107 citations in EMBASE. After reviewing the informationprovided in the titles and abstracts, eight citations were found to meet thestudy inclusion criteria. One study was then excluded because of an overlap inthe study population with a previous study. Reference checking did not produceany additional studies for inclusion. Seven case series studies, all conducted inGermany, were thus included in this review (see Table 1). Also included is therecently published CESAR trial, a multicentre RCT in the UK in which ECMO wascompared with conventional intensive care management. The results of the CESARtrial were published when this review was initiated. In the absence of any other recent RCT on ECMO, the results of this trial were considered for this assessmentand no further searches were conducted. A literature search was then conductedfor application of ECMO as bridge to LTx patients (January, 1, 2005 to current). A total of 127 citations on this topic were identified and reviewed but none werefound to have examined the use of ECMO as bridge to LTx.QUALITY OF EVIDENCE: To grade the quality of evidence, the grading systemformulated by the GRADE working group and adopted by MAS was applied. The GRADEsystem classifies the quality of a body of evidence as high, moderate, low, orvery low according to four key elements: study design, study quality, consistencyacross studies, and directness.RESULTS: TRIALS ON ILA: Of the seven studies identified, six involved patientswith ARDS caused by a range of underlying conditions; the seventh included onlypatients awaiting LTx. All studies reported the rate of gas exchange andrespiratory mechanics before ILA and for up to 7 days of ILA therapy. Fourstudies reported the means and standard deviations of blood gas transfer andarterial blood pH, which were used for meta-analysis. Fischer et al. reportedtheir first experience on the use of ILA as a bridge to LTx. In their study, 12patients at high urgency status for LTx, who also had severe ventilationrefractory hypercapnea and respiratory acidosis, were connected to ILA prior toLTx. Seven patients had a systemic infection or sepsis prior to ILA insertion.Six hours after initiation of ILA, the partial pressure of CO(2) in arterialblood significantly decreased (P < .05) and arterial blood pH significantlyimproved (P < .05) and remained stable for one week (last time point reported).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)PMCID: PMC3415698