: 12386952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1667. Herz. 2002 Aug;27(5):407-17.[Heart assist systems--current status].[Article in German]Hetzer R(1), Jurmann MJ, Potapov EV, Hennig E, Stiller B, Müller JH, Weng Y.Author information: (1)Abteilung für Herz-, Thorax- und Gefässchirurgie, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin. hetzer@dhzb.deBACKGROUND: Heart failure is the leading cause of death in the developedcountries. Organ-preserving operative procedures on the failing heart likecoronary artery bypass procedures or resection of left ventricular aneurysms are part of the routine care in cardiac surgery today. Terminal heart failurerefractory to optimized drug therapy, however, will require a hearttransplantation or the implantation of artificial blood pumps. While hearttransplantation has proven to provide excellent long-term results with 10-yearsurvival rates at 50%, it will remain a casuistic therapy, limited by thecomparatively small number of procedures which can be performed.ARTIFICIAL BLOOD PUMPS: The current status of development of artificial bloodpumps is represented by the broad availability of partially-implantable electric motor-driven left ventricular assist devices (LVAD), which still require apercutaneous cable for energy supply and device control from external sourceswhile the blood pump itself resides inside the body. The recently introducedaxial-flow devices (DeBakey, Jarvik 2000 and HeartMate II LVADs) deliver acontinuous blood flow and obviously provide distinct advantages with regard to a reduction in size, weight and energy demands, simplified implantation techniqueand device control when compared to the previously availablepartially-implantable electric motor-driven pulsatile blood pumps (Novacor N100, TCl Heart Mate LVADs). The first systems designed for long-term or permanent use (Lion Heart LVAD, AbioCor replacement heart) are completely implantable devicesfeaturing percutaneous energy transmission and device control. However, thelatter are more complex devices and their clinical application is still limitedto a small number of cases, which precludes a judgment about their potential atthis time.INDICATIONS: The use of paracorporeal pneumatically accentuated blood pumpsystems is still indicated in cases of most severe biventricular heart failureand multiorgan failure or if only short- to mid-term circulatory support isanticipated. Well established indications for utilization of artificial bloodpumps are the bridge-to-transplant procedure, which yields results comparable to primary heart transplantation, and acute cardiac failure following myocardialinfarction or cardiac surgical procedures. In newborns and children, encouraging results were obtained when miniaturized blood pumps of the Berlin Heart Systemwere utilized for heart failure in myocarditis or dilative cardiomyopathy. Withadvanced reliability of artificial blood pumps and in face of the high incidence of heart failure, especially in the older age group, the long-term application ofartificial bloods pump appears to be justified.