: 17703917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1272. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2007 Aug;26(8):819-25.Suction events during left ventricular support and ventricular arrhythmias.Vollkron M(1), Voitl P, Ta J, Wieselthaler G, Schima H.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,Austria. michael.vollkron@meduniwien.ac.at <michael.vollkron@meduniwien.ac.at>BACKGROUND: Axial blood pumps have very successfully entered the arena ofprolonged clinical support. However, they offer only limited inherentload-responsive mechanisms for adjusting pumping performance to venous return andchanges in the physiologic requirements of the patient. Therefore, excessiveventricular unloading can be observed in various situations of temporarilyreduced venous return. In this study we report severe ventricular arrhythmiasclosely related to suction events in rotary blood pumps, a phenomenon that hasnot been described previously.METHODS: Data from a clinical trial intended to prove the feasibility of anautomatic speed control system for pump recipients were analyzed with regard toelectrocardiographic changes during ventricular collapse. The occurrence ofexcessive unloading was detected by an automatic suction detection system.Electrocardiograms (ECGs) were classified semi-manually, aided by a graphical useinterface. For statistical data analysis, Wilcoxon's signed-rank test wasutilized.RESULTS: After automatic suction detection a significant increase in monomorphic ventricular tachycardia was observed, from 0.015 to 0.099 event per second (p <0.05). Furthermore, it was found that arrhythmic activity in terms of morphologicventricular tachycardia increased after suction from 0.009 to 0.014 event persecond.CONCLUSIONS: Excessive ventricular unloading of the left ventricle duringcontinuous left ventricular support can induce ventricular arrhythmias. Wedetected evidence supporting an increase in arrhythmic activity after suction.This turned out to be a transient effect, which vanished within 5 minutes aftersuction. ECG events related to suction have a sudden onset and are severeventricular arrhythmias, which can consist of even just one extrasystolic beat,and they usually cease after clearance of suction.