: 15093719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1545. Jpn Heart J. 2004 Mar;45(2):183-93.Interleukin-6 and cardiovascular diseases.Kanda T(1), Takahashi T.Author information: (1)Department of General Medicine, Kanazawa Medical University, Ishikawa, Japan.Inflammatory cytokines are important for both cardiovascular scientists andpracticing clinicians. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) has been emphasized by reports ofelevated circulating as well as intracardiac IL-6 levels in patients withcongestive heart failure (CHF). IL-6 may contribute to the progression ofmyocardial damage and dysfunction in chronic heart failure syndrome resultingfrom different causes. As the cause of CHF in cardiomyopathy, myocarditis,allograft rejection, and left ventricular assist device (LVADs) conditions,circulating IL-6 levels are associated with the severity of left ventriculardysfunction, and are also strong predictors of subsequent clinical outcomes.Continuous and excessive production of IL-6 promotes myocardial injury bybreaking down both cytokine networks and viral clearance under viral myocarditis.Although IL-6 is likely important in the process of viral antigen presentation,early activation of immune responses and attenuation of viral replication alsoappear to be significant in an animal model of viral myocarditis. IL-6 can cause cardiac hypertrophy through the IL-6 signal transducing receptor component,glycoprotein 130. There are several interesting cases of cardiac myxomacomplicated with mediastinal lymphadenopathy or left ventricular hypertrophy.Increased expression of IL-6 is observed in the myocardium of all donor heartsshowing marked dysfunction. Myocardial IL-6 concentrations are also significantlyhigher in LVAD candidates compared with advanced heart failure patients. Althoughthe IL-6 family plays a central role in the pathophysiology of cardiovasculardiseases, it remains to be determined whether the IL-6 family is beneficial ordetrimental. Future study will be needed to resolve this question.