: 15112890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1539. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004 May;77(5):1642-7.Initial experience with miniature axial flow ventricular assist devices forpostcardiotomy heart failure.Jurmann MJ(1), Siniawski H, Erb M, Drews T, Hetzer R.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin, Berlin, Germany. jurmann@dhb.deBACKGROUND: The recently introduced Impella Recover (Impella CardioSystems AG,Aachen, Germany) microaxial flow left and right ventricular assist devices(LVAD/RVAD) were evaluated as they provide circulatory support in the setting of postcardiotomy heart failure refractory to high-dose inotropic and intra-aorticballoon pump (IABP) support.METHODS: Between May 2002 and November 2002, the Recover LVAD was implanted insix patients (64 +/- 11 years) with acute left heart failure following coronaryartery bypass procedures. Preoperative left ventricular (LV) ejection fractionwas compromised (28% +/- 12%, 12% to 45%). Three patients presented with unstablecirculation or cardiogenic shock following acute myocardial infarction, with apredicted mortality rate of 44% +/- 11% (EuroSCORE). Intraoperatively, severeheart failure was present with a more than 70% mortality rate predicted by theIABP score. The Recover RVAD and LVAD were combined to provide biventricularassist device (BVAD) support in one case of post-transplant graft failure.RESULTS: The Recover LVAD delivered blood flows of up to 5 L/min. A moderatedegree of hemolysis and a reduction in platelet count were noted. Four patientswere weaned from the LVAD after 169 +/- 34 hours, two of whom remain long-termsurvivors. Full recovery of graft function allowed weaning of the patient fromBVAD support after six days.CONCLUSIONS: The initial experience with the Impella Recover VADs proved the new systems to be advantageous regarding the ease of implantation and device removal,low anticoagulation requirements, and advanced weaning features. In cases ofsevere heart failure, survival was improved by using LVADs when compared to that predicted by solely continuing IABP and drug support.