: 25865791  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]16. Congenit Heart Dis. 2015 Apr 10. doi: 10.1111/chd.12260. [Epub ahead of print]Pediatric Quality of Life while Supported with a Ventricular Assist Device.Miller JR(1), Boston US, Epstein DJ, Henn MC, Lawrance CP, Kallenbach J, Simpson KE, Canter CE, Eghtesady P.Author information: (1)Section of Pediatric Cardiothoracic Surgery, Washington University School ofMedicine, St. Louis, Mo, USA.OBJECTIVE: Ventricular assist devices (VADs) have emerged as an importanttreatment option for bridging pediatric patients with heart failure totransplant. VADs have shown improved survival; however, the pediatric quality of life (QoL) while on VAD support is unknown. We aimed to evaluate the QoL of ourpediatric patients while supported with a VAD.DESIGN: In this prospective study, pediatric patients who underwent VADplacement, and their parents, were administered a generic Pediatric Quality ofLife Inventory (PedsQL) 4.0 pre-VAD implant, when feasible, after the acutepostoperative period, and then periodically until heart transplant or death.Their final scores while on support were compared with three previously reported groups: healthy controls, outpatients with severe heart disease, and childrenafter heart transplant.RESULTS: From January 2008 to July 2014, 13 pediatric patients required VADsupport greater than 2 weeks and completed a PedsQL. The mean age at implant was 10.0 ± 4.2 years and median duration of support was 1.6 (0.5-19.7) months. Eleven(85%) patients survived to transplant with one (8%) patient remaining alive onsupport. The median duration of support prior to their final PedsQL was 1.4(0.5-11.4) months. Patients self-reported significantly (P < .05) lower total andphysical QoL scores when compared with all three comparison groups. Self-reportedpsychosocial QoL scores were significantly lower than healthy controls only.Parent proxy-reported scores were significantly lower than all three comparisongroups for all three categories (P < .05).CONCLUSIONS: A large deficit exists in the total QoL of pediatric patientssupported by a VAD compared with outpatient management of severe heart disease orpostheart transplant patients; however, VAD patients do represent a group withmore severe heart failure. Improvements in QoL must be made, as time spent with aVAD will likely continue to increase.© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.