: 11758106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1715. Cardiovasc Res. 2002 Jan;53(1):124-30.Reversible activation of nuclear factor-kappaB in human end-stage heart failureafter left ventricular mechanical support.Grabellus F(1), Levkau B, Sokoll A, Welp H, Schmid C, Deng MC, Takeda A,Breithardt G, Baba HA.Author information: (1)The Gerhard-Domagk-Institute of Pathology, University of Münster,Domagkstrasse 17, 48149 Münster, Germany.OBJECTIVE: Left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) have been used to 'bridge'patients with end-stage heart failure to transplantation. Although severalreports have suggested that the native ventricular function recovers afterlong-term LVAD support, a process called 'reverse remodeling', the underlyingbiological mechanisms are still unknown. As the transcription factor nuclearfactor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) has been shown to be active in the failing human heart,we examined whether its activity is altered under LVAD support, and may thuscontribute to the dynamic process of 'reverse remodeling'.METHODS: The activity of NF-kappaB was studied in 16 patients with end-stageheart failure (eight with dilated cardiomyopathy, six with ischemic heartdisease, one with myocarditis, and one with congenital heart disease) before and after LVAD support by immunohistochemistry using an antibody against activeNF-kappaB. Gel-shifts for NF-kappaB DNA-binding activity were performed withpaired human myocardial tissue from four patients. The mean cardiomyocytediameter before and after mechanical unloading was measured with an imageanalyzer system.RESULTS: 15 patients out of 16 showed a significant decrease in the number ofNF-kappaB positive cardiomyocyte nuclei after LVAD support in the leftventricular myocardium. The NF-kappaB DNA-binding activity also decreased afterLVAD support as measured by gel-shift analysis. While the number of positivecardiomyocytes was significantly higher in the subendocardium than in thesubepicardium at the time of LVAD implantation, this difference was no longerpresent at the time of LVAD explantation. The diameter of cardiomyocytes in theleft ventricle decreased significantly as a parameter of structural reverseremodeling.CONCLUSION: LVAD support decreases the extent of NF-kappaB activation in failing human hearts, suggesting that NF-kappaB may be involved in the process of'reverse remodeling'.