: 16446217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1414. Artif Organs. 2006 Feb;30(2):94-100.In vivo experimental testing of a microaxial blood pump for right ventricularsupport.Christiansen S(1), Perez-Bouza A, Reul H, Autschbach R.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Aachen, 50724, Germany.schristiansen@ukaachen.deThe incidence of isolated right ventricular (RV) failure is rare inpostcardiotomy patients, but high in patients undergoing implantation of a leftventricular assist device or cardiac transplantation. Therefore, we havedeveloped a new microaxial flow device and report on our first in vivo animaltrials. Six healthy adult female sheep weighing 80-90 kg underwent implantationof the microaxial blood pump for partial unloading of the right ventricle. Thispump is a miniaturized rotary blood pump with a diameter of only 6.4 mm and aweight of 11 g. The inner volume of the pump is limited to 12 mL, and the innerartificial blood contacting surface is 65 cm(2). The pump consists of a rotordriven by an incorporated brushless direct current motor, the housing of therotor, the inflow cage, the outflow cannula, and the driveline. At the maximumspeed of 32,500 rotations/min, a flow of 6 L/min can be delivered. The inflow andoutflow conduit were anastomosed to the right atrium and the main pulmonaryartery, respectively. Hemodynamic and echocardiographic data as well as bloodsamples were measured over the whole test period of 7 days. The hearts and lungs as well as the pump were explanted for a thorough examination at the end of thetrial. Systemic arterial blood pressures remained unchanged during the entiretest period. RV cardiac output was diminished significantly as demonstrated bythe echocardiographic studies. The number of platelets decreased perioperatively,but recovered within the test period. The free hemoglobin was not enhancedpostoperatively indicating no significant hemolysis. Liver function was onlyslightly impaired due to operative reasons (increase in bilirubin on the firstpostoperative day but normalization within the test period). The pathologicexamination revealed some clots at the inflow cage and fibrin depositions on the impeller as well as on the inner surface of the outflow graft without animpairment of pump function. Our results demonstrate that this newly developedmicroaxial blood pump is a promising device for RV support, but it cannot bedriven without any anticoagulation.