: 12467821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1659. An Esp Pediatr. 2002 Nov;57(5):480-3.[External ventricular assist devices as circulatory support in patients withdilated cardiomyopathy].[Article in Spanish]Granados Molina A(1), García Menor E, Jaraba Caballero S, Ibarra de la Rosa I,Ulloa Santamaría E, Pérez Navero JL, Arizón de Prado JM, Merino Cejas C.Author information: (1)Unidad de Cuidados Intensivos Pediátricos. Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía.Córdoba. España.Ventricular assist devices have demonstrated their utility in patients withintractable cardiac failure, both as support until complete myocardial recoveryand as a bridge to transplantation. Specific pediatric pneumatic paracorporealsystems can be applied even in infants. Long-term survival has been reportedalthough experience is limited. We report the case of an 8-year-old boy withdilated cardiomyopathy awaiting cardiac transplantation. The patient developedprofound cardiogenic shock with multiorgan failure while being evaluated forheart transplantation. He was given biventricular assistance with the MEDOS-HIAsystem (MEDOS-Helmholtz Institute). Maximum stroke volume ventricles of 25 and 22ml were used, achieving a cardiac output of 2.2 l/min in both ventricles. Thepatient was supported with ventricular assistance for 9 days, but multiple organ failed to improve and transplantation became impossible. Progressive loss ofperipheral circulatory resistance unresponsive to treatment developed andventricular assistance was discontinued. The previous severe shock and advancedand progressive multiorgan failure could be responsible for the poor outcome ofour patient despite maintenance of adequate cardiac output. Nevertheless, the useof ventricular assist devices is a real therapeutic alternative in children with severe cardiogenic shock, allowing them to recover completely or undergo hearttransplantation. Patient selection, the choice of a system of appropriate size,and early implantation seem to be the cornerstones for obtaining good results.