: 18087826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1245. J Artif Organs. 2007;10(4):187-94. Epub 2007 Dec 20.Domestic and foreign trends in the prevalence of heart failure and the necessity of next-generation artificial hearts: a survey by the Working Group onEstablishment of Assessment Guidelines for Next-Generation Artificial HeartSystems.Tatsumi E(1), Nakatani T, Imachi K, Umezu M, Kyo SE, Sase K, Takatani S, Matsuda H.Author information: (1)Laboratory for Research Evaluation, Advanced Medical Engineering Center,National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, 5-7-1 Fujishiro-dai, Suita,Osaka, 565-8565, Japan. tatsumi@ri.ncvc.go.jpA series of guidelines for development and assessment of next-generation medical devices has been drafted under an interagency collaborative project by theMinistry of Health, Labor and Welfare and the Ministry of Economy, Trade andIndustry. The working group for assessment guidelines of next-generationartificial hearts reviewed the trend in the prevalence of heart failure andexamined the potential usefulness of such devices in Japan and in other countriesas a fundamental part of the process of establishing appropriate guidelines. Atpresent, more than 23 million people suffer from heart failure in developedcountries, including Japan. Although Japan currently has the lowest mortalityfrom heart failure among those countries, the number of patients is graduallyincreasing as our lifestyle becomes more Westernized; the associated medicalexpenses are rapidly growing. The number of heart transplantations, however, islimited due to the overwhelming shortage of donor hearts, not only in Japan butworldwide. Meanwhile, clinical studies and surveys have revealed that the majorcauses of death in patients undergoing long-term use of ventricular assistdevices (VADs) were infection, thrombosis, and mechanical failure, all of whichare typical of VADs. It is therefore of urgent and universal necessity to developnext-generation artificial hearts that have excellent durability to provide atleast 2 years of event-free operation with a superior quality of life and thatcan be used for destination therapy to save patients with irreversible heartfailure. It is also very important to ensure that an environment that facilitatesthe development, testing, and approval evaluation processes of next-generationartificial hearts be established as soon as possible.