: 9441154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1901. Ann Thorac Surg. 1997 Dec;64(6):1757-62; discussion 1762-3.Improved results for postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock with the use of implantableleft ventricular assist devices.DeRose JJ Jr(1), Umana JP, Argenziano M, Catanese KA, Levin HR, Sun BC, Rose EA, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, New York, USA. jjd11@columbia.eduBACKGROUND: Over the past decade, the use of mechanical circulatory support inpatients with postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock has resulted in hospital dischargerates of 25% to 40%. In an attempt to improve patient survival, we initiated aprogram of early insertion of an implantable Thermocardiosystems IncorporatedHeartmate left ventricular assist device in patients who have circulatory failureafter having undergone high-risk cardiac operations.METHODS: Between April 1993 and February 1997, 12 patients underwent insertion ofan implantable left ventricular assist device for postcardiotomy cardiogenicshock after coronary artery bypass grafting. Indications for insertion includedpostoperative cardiogenic shock (7 patients), postoperative cardiac arrest (3patients), and failure to wean from cardiopulmonary bypass (2 patients).RESULTS: The median time to device insertion was 3.5 days. The mean duration ofleft ventricular assist device support was 103 +/- 19 days (range, 2 to 225days). Nine of 11 patients (82%) survived to undergo either transplantation (8patients) or explantation (1 patient), with successful hospital discharge of all 9 patients. The major complication was device-related infection (42%). A singlethromboembolism occurred in a patient with an infection.CONCLUSIONS: Long-term outcome after postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock is improvedsubstantially with the use of an implantable left ventricular assist device earlyin the postoperative course. Access to such a device is an importantconsideration before undertaking a high-risk cardiac operation, and earlyimplantation of the device is a critical factor in ensuring long-term survival.