: 10567307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1833. Circulation. 1999 Nov 9;100(19 Suppl):II206-10.Extracorporeal life support to left ventricular assist device bridge to hearttransplant: A strategy to optimize survival and resource utilization.Pagani FD(1), Lynch W, Swaniker F, Dyke DB, Bartlett R, Koelling T, Moscucci M,Deeb GM, Bolling S, Monaghan H, Aaronson KD.Author information: (1)Heart Transplant Program, Section of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109, USA. fpagani@umich.eduBACKGROUND: The use of extracorporeal life support (extracorporeal membraneoxygenation [ECMO]) as a direct bridge to heart transplant in adult patients isassociated with poor survival. Similarly, the use of an implantable leftventricular assist device (LVAD) to salvage patients with cardiac arrest, severe hemodynamic instability, and multiorgan failure results in poor outcome. The use of LVAD implant in patients who present with cardiogenic shock who have not been evaluated for transplantation or who have sustained a recent myocardialinfarction also raises concerns. ECMO may provide reasonable short-term supportto patients with severe hemodynamic instability, permit recovery of multiorganinjury, and allow time to complete a transplant evaluation before long-termcirculatory support with an implantable LVAD is instituted. After acquisition of the HeartMate LVAD (Thermo Cardiosystems, Inc), we began using ECMO as a bridgeto an implantable LVAD and, subsequently, to transplantation in selectedhigh-risk patients.METHODS AND RESULTS: From October 1, 1996, through September 30, 1998, 32 adultpatients who presented with refractory cardiogenic shock (cardiac index <2.0 L.min(-1). m(-2), with systolic blood pressure <100 mm Hg and pulmonary capillarywedge pressure >/=24 mm Hg and dependent on >/=2 inotropes with or withoutintra-aortic balloon pump) were evaluated and accepted as candidates formechanical assistance as a bridge to transplant. Of the 32 patients, 14 (group I)had a cardiac arrest or severe hemodynamic instability (systolic blood pressure</=75 mm Hg) with evidence of multiorgan failure (defined as serum creatininelevel >3 mg/dL or oliguria; international normalized ratio >1.5 or transaminases >5 times normal or total bilirubin >3 mg/dL; and needing mechanical ventilation).Group I patients were placed on ECMO support; 7 underwent subsequent LVAD implantand 1 was bridged directly to transplant. Six patients in group I survived totransplant hospitalization discharge. The remaining 18 patients (group II)underwent LVAD implant without ECMO support; 12 survived to transplanthospitalization discharge and 2 remained alive with ongoing LVAD support andawaited transplant. One-year actuarial survival from the initiation ofcirculatory support was 43% in group I and 75% in group II. One-year actuarialsurvival from the time of LVAD implant in group I, conditional on surviving ECMO,was 71% (P=NS compared with group II).CONCLUSIONS: In appropriately selected high-risk patients, the rate of LVADsurvival after initial ECMO support was not significantly different from thesurvival rate after LVAD support alone. An initial period of resuscitation withECMO is an effective strategy to salvage patients with extreme hemodynamicinstability and multiorgan injury. Use of LVAD resources is improved by avoiding LVAD implant in a very-high-risk cohort of patients who do not survive ECMO.