: 9654701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1887. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998 Jun;65(6):1625-30.HeartMate left ventricular assist device as bridge to heart transplantation.Koul B(1), Solem JO, Steen S, Casimir-Ahn H, Granfeldt H, Lönn UJ.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital inLund, Sweden.BACKGROUND: Because of the limited supply of donor hearts, prospective recipientscontinue to die while on the waiting list for heart transplantation. Use oflong-term mechanical circulatory support devices as a bridge to transplantationmay reduce this mortality. However, with the present state of technology,continued clinical evaluation of the various long-term, mechanical circulatorysupport devices available is mandatory.METHODS: Sixteen patients were bridged with the HeartMate left ventricular assistdevice (LVAD) to heart transplantation for New York Heart Association functional class IV cardiac failure. Twelve pneumatic and six electric devices were used.The mean cardiac index and the mean pulmonary vascular resistance of the patient cohort were 1.71 x min(-1) x m(-2) and 3.1 Wood units, respectively.RESULTS: The mean LVAD support time per transplanted patient was 237 days, with acumulative LVAD support time of about 7.2 years. Bleeding was the main operative and postoperative complication. Two patients suffered from neurologiccomplications and there were two major incidents of device malfunction. Twelvepatients (75%) now have received a transplant, 3 (19%) are awaiting a transplant,and in 1 patient (6%), the device was explanted after spontaneous leftventricular recovery. Eleven of the 12 patients who received a transplant arealive and doing well. The HeartMate LVAD gave adequate circulatory support overextended periods of time and reversed the vital organ dysfunction. Since thestart of the LVAD program, only 1 patient has died on our heart transplantationwaiting list, compared to nine deaths in the 2 preceding years.CONCLUSIONS: The HeartMate LVAD bridge to heart transplantation can be performed with low post-LVAD implantation and posttransplantation mortality and offers 1-and 2-year posttransplantation actuarial survival rates comparable to those fornonbridged heart transplant recipients.