: 23839571  [PubMed - in process]399. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013 Jul;6(4):451-60. doi:10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.113.000121. Epub 2013 Jul 9.Cognitive change in heart failure: a systematic review.Hajduk AM(1), Kiefe CI, Person SD, Gore JG, Saczynski JS.Author information: (1)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, University of MassachusettsMedical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA. alexandra.hajduk@umassmed.eduBACKGROUND: Cognitive impairment, highly prevalent in patients with heart failure(HF), increases risk for hospitalization and mortality. However, the course ofcognitive change in HF is not well characterized. The purpose of this systematic review was to examine the available evidence longitudinal changes in cognitivefunction in patients with HF.METHODS AND RESULTS: A literature search of several electronic databases wasperformed. Studies published from January 1, 1980, to September 30, 2012, thatused validated measures to diagnose HF and assess cognitive function ≥2× inadults with HF were eligible for inclusion. Change in cognitive function wasexamined in the context of HF treatments applied (eg, medication initiation, leftventricular assist device implantation), length of follow-up, and comparisongroup. Fifteen studies met eligibility criteria. Significant decline in cognitivefunction was noted among patients with HF followed up for >1 year. Improvementsin cognition were observed among patients with HF undergoing interventions toimprove cardiac function (eg, heart transplantation) and among patients examined over short time periods (<1 year). Studies comparing patients' cognition overtime with their own baseline tended to report improvements, whereas studies usinga comparison group without HF tended to report declines or stability in cognitionover time among patients with HF.CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HF are at increased risk for cognitive decline, butthis risk seems to be modifiable with cardiac treatment. Further research isneeded to identify the mechanisms that cause cognitive changes in HF.PMCID: PMC3872030