: 25770410  [PubMed - in process]30. JACC Heart Fail. 2015 Apr;3(4):314-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2014.11.009. Epub 2015Mar 11.Anti-Factor Xa and Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time Measurements for HeparinMonitoring in Mechanical Circulatory Support.Adatya S(1), Uriel N(2), Yarmohammadi H(3), Holley CT(3), Feng A(3), Roy SS(3),Reding MT(4), John R(3), Eckman P(3), Zantek ND(5).Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, Cardiology Division, University of Minnesota,Minneapolis, Minnesota. Electronic address: snadatya@umn.edu. (2)Department ofMedicine, Cardiology Division, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.(3)Department of Medicine, Cardiology Division, University of Minnesota,Minneapolis, Minnesota. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology,Oncology and Transplantation, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,Minneapolis, Minnesota.OBJECTIVES: This study investigated the relationship between anti-factor Xa(anti-FXa) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) for monitoringintravenous unfractionated heparin (IV-UFH) in patients with continuous-flow leftventricular assist devices (CF-LVADs).BACKGROUND: CF-LVADs have become mainstream therapy for patients with advancedheart failure. Thromboembolic events, device thrombosis, and bleeding continue tobe a challenge with this technology. Adequate anticoagulation is required toprevent these adverse events.METHODS: A prospective study of consecutive patients implanted with a CF-LVAD wasconducted. Paired samples were considered concordant if aPTT values fell intoexpected ranges for subtherapeutic, therapeutic, and supratherapeutic anti-FXalevels. Heparin dosing was on the basis of anti-Xa levels.RESULTS: A total of 340 paired values from 38 patients were evaluated. Anti-FXaand aPTT were discordant in 253 samples (74.4%), with a high degree ofvariability in aPTT for any given anti-FXa level (r(2) = 0.57). Results werediscordant in 104 samples (63.8%) from patients undergoing bridging therapy with warfarin and in 149 samples (84.2%) from patients with device obstruction and/or hemolysis (p < 0.001). The most common pattern of discordance was asupratherapeutic aPTT value despite a therapeutic anti-FXa level (49.1% forbridging vs. 75.8% for device obstruction and/or hemolysis; p < 0.001).CONCLUSIONS: Levels of aPTT were disproportionately prolonged relative to thecorresponding anti-FXa levels in CF-LVAD patients, particularly those with deviceobstruction. Hemolysis and warfarin administration may falsely elevate aPTT,resulting in overestimation of heparin concentration and under-anticoagulation.Use of aPTT and anti-FXa to guide heparin therapy may lead to different estimatesof heparin concentration in the same patient.Copyright © 2015 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by ElsevierInc. All rights reserved.