: 15731546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1487. Circ Res. 2005 Mar 18;96(5):592-9. Epub 2005 Feb 17.Mixed messages: transcription patterns in failing and recovering humanmyocardium.Margulies KB(1), Matiwala S, Cornejo C, Olsen H, Craven WA, Bednarik D.Author information: (1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine,Philadelphia, Pa 19104-6160, USA. kenb@mail.med.upenn.eduIn previous studies, mechanical support of medically refractory hearts with aleft ventricular assist device (LVAD) has induced regression of manymorphological and functional abnormalities characteristic of failing humanhearts. To identify transcriptional adaptations in failing and LVAD-supportedhearts, we performed a comprehensive transcription analysis using the Affymetrix microarray platform and 199 human myocardial samples from nonfailing, failing,and LVAD-supported human hearts. We also used a novel analytical strategy thatdefines patterns of interest based on multiple intergroup comparisons. Althoughover 3088 transcripts exhibited significantly altered abundance in heart failure,most of these did not exhibit a consistent response to LVAD support based on our analysis. Of those 238 with a consistent response to LVAD support, more than 75% exhibited persistence or exacerbation of HF-associated transcriptionalabnormalities whereas only 11%, 5%, and 2% exhibited partial recovery,normalization, and overcorrection responses, respectively. Even among genesimplicated by previous reports of LVAD-associated myocardial improvements,partial or complete normalization of transcription did not predominate. Themagnitude of differences in transcript abundance between nonfailing and failinghearts, and between failing an LVAD-supported hearts, tended to be low withchanges greater than or equal to 2-fold infrequently observed. Our resultsindicate that morphological or functional myocardial improvements may occurwithout widespread normalization of pathological transcriptional patterns. These observations also suggest that many failure-associated transcriptional changeshave only a limited role in regulating cardiac structure and function and mayrepresent epiphenomena and/or nonspecific myocardial plasticity responses.Differences in mRNA localization, translation efficiency, and posttranslationalprotein modifications or interactions may be more pivotal in regulatingmyocardial structure and function.