: 25329333  [PubMed - in process]97. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014 Nov;7(6):905-11. doi:10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.114.000892. Epub 2014 Oct 14.Educational resources for patients considering a left ventricular assist device: a cross-sectional review of internet, print, and multimedia materials.Iacovetto MC(1), Matlock DD(1), McIlvennan CK(1), Thompson JS(1), Bradley W(1),LaRue SJ(1), Allen LA(2).Author information: (1)From the School of Medicine (M.C.I.), Divisions of General Internal Medicine(D.D.M.) and Cardiology (C.K.M., L.A.A.), and Colorado Health Outcomes Program(D.D.M., C.K.M., J.S.T., L.A.A.), University of Colorado School of Medicine,Aurora; Mechanical Circulatory Support Program, University of Colorado Hospital, Aurora (W.B.); and Section of Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplantation, Divisionof Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis-School of Medicine, MO (S.J.L.). (2)From the School of Medicine (M.C.I.), Divisions ofGeneral Internal Medicine (D.D.M.) and Cardiology (C.K.M., L.A.A.), and Colorado Health Outcomes Program (D.D.M., C.K.M., J.S.T., L.A.A.), University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora; Mechanical Circulatory Support Program, University ofColorado Hospital, Aurora (W.B.); and Section of Heart Failure and CardiacTransplantation, Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, WashingtonUniversity in St. Louis-School of Medicine, MO (S.J.L.).larry.allen@ucdenver.edu.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are being used withincreasing frequency to treat severe heart failure. Patients seek outinformational resources when considering implantation. The primary studyobjective was to characterize the scope and quality of available LVAD educationalmaterials.METHODS AND RESULTS: In July 2013, we performed a cross-sectional search ofInternet, print, and multimedia resources available to patients considering LVAD.Written materials <10 sentences, videos <2 minutes, and materials clearlydirected to healthcare professionals were excluded. Seventy-seven materials metinclusion criteria. Potential benefits of LVAD therapy were discussed in all(n=77), whereas less often mentioned were risks (n=43), lifestyle considerations (n=29), surgical details (n=26), caregiver information (n=9), and hospice orpalliative care (n=2). Of the 14 materials that recognized a decision oralternate treatment option, 7 used outdated statistics, 12 scored above an eighthgrade reading comprehension level, and 12 met <50% of International PatientDecision Aid Standards criteria. In the survey participants rated all but one as biased toward accepting LVAD therapy.CONCLUSIONS: Although many resources exist for patients considering an LVAD, the content is suboptimal. Benefits of LVADs are often presented in the absence ofrisks, alternative options, and caregiver considerations. Most materials useoutdated statistics, are above the reading level of average Americans, and arebiased toward accepting LVAD therapy. There is no tool that would qualify as aformal decision aid.© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.