: 17669821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1277. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2007 Feb;6(1):66-70. Epub 2006 Nov 21.Intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in decompensated cardiomyopathy patients:bridge to transplantation or assist device.Norkiene I(1), Ringaitiene D, Rucinskas K, Samalavicius R, Baublys A, Miniauskas S, Sirvydis V.Author information: (1)Center of Anaesthesia, Intensive Care and Pain Management, Clinic of HeartDiseases, Vilnius University Hospital, Santariskiu Clinics, Santariskiu 2,Vilnius, Lithuania. ievanork@yahoo.comOBJECTIVES: The crucial decision to progress from pharmacological treatment ofacute decompensated heart failure to institution of assist device ortransplantation begins with evaluation of the chances for a successful recovery. We tested whether the intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation (IABP) could give us the necessary time for clinical decision-making and preserve adequate circulationuntil it is made.METHODS: We assessed 11 dilated cardiomyopathy patients of NYHA class IV, listed for heart transplantation or a ventricular assist device (VAD), who hadconventional IABP placed. Heart function prior to and after IABP insertion aswell as hemodynamics, end-organ function (renal and hepatic), frequency ofcomplications and clinical outcomes were assessed.RESULTS: The duration of intra-aortic balloon pump insertion ranged from 72 to360 h (mean 181.54+/-81.65). After 48 h of intra-aortic balloon pump support,there was a significant increase of mean systemic arterial pressure from74.5+/-9.6 to 82.3+/-4.7 mmHg (P=0.02), and ejection fraction from 14.7+/-6.4 to 21.0+/-8.6 (P=0.014). Meanwhile improvement of cardiac index, pulmonary wedgepressure and end-organ perfusion markers did not reach statistical significance. Three patients were successfully weaned off the balloon and recovered withoutadditional interventions, two patients were transplanted and three were supportedwith counterpulsation until the implantation of assist device. Three patientsdied due to progressive heart failure, two after IABP removal and one after VADimplantation. There was no incidence of infection, limb ischemia, thrombus, orembolic complications.CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed that intra-aortic balloon pump support may besuccessfully and safely used in the acute decompensated dilated cardiomyopathypatients, as an urgent measure of cardiac support, to stabilize the patient andmaintain organ perfusion until transplant is available, VAD is placed or patient is weaned from IABP.