: 23315371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]504. J Physiol Biochem. 2013 Sep;69(3):477-85. doi: 10.1007/s13105-013-0235-x. Epub2013 Jan 15.Dynamic expression profiles of MMPs/TIMPs and collagen deposition in mechanicallyunloaded rat heart: implications for left ventricular assist devicesupport-induced cardiac alterations.Wang L(1), Xu YX, Du XJ, Sun QG, Tian YJ.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Shandong Corps Hospital of Chinese People's ArmedPolice Forces, Jinan, Shandong, People's Republic of China.Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) ameliorate heart failure by reducingpreload and afterload. However, extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition afterapplication of LVADs is not clearly defined. The purpose of the present study wasto investigate ECM remodeling after mechanical unloading in a rat hearttransplant model. Sixty male Lewis rats were subjected to abdominal heterotopicheart transplantation, and the transplanted hearts were pressure- andvolume-unloaded. The age- and weight- matched male Lewis rats who had undergoneopen thoracic surgeries were used as the control. Left ventricle ECM accumulationand the expression/activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissueinhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) were measured on the third,seventh, and fourteenth days after transplantation/sham surgery. Compared withthe control group, myocardial ECM deposition significantly increased on theseventh and fourteenth days after heart transplantation (P < 0.05) and peaked on the 14th day. The gelatinase activity as well as mRNA expression of MMP-2 andMMP-9 significantly increased after transplantation (P < 0.05). Both mRNA andprotein levels of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 significantly increased compared with thoseof the control group. Mechanical unloading may lead to adverse remodeling of the ECM of the left ventricle. The underlying mechanism may due to the imbalance ofthe MMP/TIMP system, especially the remarkable upregulation of TIMPs in thepressure and volume unloaded heart.