: 15949738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1465. Perfusion. 2005 Mar;20(2):83-90.Inflammatory cytokine inhibition of erythropoiesis in patients implanted with amechanical circulatory assist device.Pierce CN(1), Larson DF.Author information: (1)The University of Arizona Graduate Program in Circulatory Sciences, College ofMedicine, Sarver Heart Center and University Medical Center, Tucson, AZ, USA.Erratum in    Perfusion. 2005 May;20(3):183.Mechanical circulatory assist devices (MCADs) are increasingly utilizedindependently of cardiac transplantation in the management of heart failure.Though MCAD use incorporates inherent mechanical risks, the inevitable onset ofchronic anemia, with its associated morbidity and mortality, is also asignificant concern. MCAD support has been correlated with elevated plasma levelsof inflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, and IL-6, which have separatelybeen found to inhibit erythropoietin (Epo)-induced erythrocyte (RBC) maturation. Previous analysis of hematological parameters for MCAD-supported patientsconcluded that an amplified inflammatory response impedes RBC proliferation andrecovery from hemolytic anemia. Additional analysis may bolster this assertion.Hemoglobin concentration (HC), RBC distribution width (RDW), mean cell volume(MCV), and cardiac index were retrospectively analysed for 78 MCAD-supportedpatients implanted for greater than 30 days at the University of Arizona HealthSciences Center from 1996 to 2002. Analysis confirms that the HC, a conventional marker for anemia, declines with MCAD placement and remains below the clinically defined, minimum normal value. Inversely, the RDW rises above maximum normalmeasure, signifying an increased fraction of juvenile RBCs. The MCV remainsunchanged and within normal limits, demonstrating adequate substrate for RBCformation. MCAD performance also stabilizes as adequate perfusion returns. These results further support our previously published conclusion that a sufficientresponse of erythropoiesis occurs in reaction to the onset of anemia by anincreased production of immature RBCs. However, the cells never fully mature and join circulation. The patient's inflammatory cytokine response to the implanteddevice most likely mediates the chronic MCAD-induced anemia by inhibition of Epo effects.