: 12579117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1653. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Feb 5;41(3):381-5.Severe renal dysfunction complicating cardiogenic shock is not a contraindicationto mechanical support as a bridge to cardiac transplantation.Khot UN(1), Mishra M, Yamani MH, Smedira NG, Paganini E, Yeager M, Buda T,McCarthy PM, Young JB, Starling RC.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kaufman Center for Heart Failure, TheCleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA. khot@cvresearch.netOBJECTIVES: This study investigated outcomes in patients with cardiogenic shockand severe renal dysfunction treated with ventricular assist devices (VAD) as abridge to cardiac transplantation.BACKGROUND: Previous reports have documented poor survival in patients withcardiogenic shock and severe renal dysfunction treated with VAD.METHODS: We surveyed 215 consecutive patients who received a VAD from 1992 to2000 and selected patients who had a serum creatinine > or =3.0 mg/dl at the timeof VAD placement. Demographic, laboratory, and clinical outcome data werecollected.RESULTS: Eighteen patients met the inclusion criteria. Mean serum creatinine atthe time of VAD placement was 4.0 +/- 0.7 mg/dl (range 3.0 to 5.2 mg/dl). Sevenpatients required temporary renal support with continuous venovenous hemodialysis(CVVHD). Eleven patients underwent cardiac transplantation. At six monthspost-transplantation, mean serum creatinine was 2.0 +/- 0.6 mg/dl (range 1.3 to3.5 mg/dl). None of the transplanted patients required subsequent renal support. Seven patients died with a VAD before transplantation. Three died early (<1month) after VAD placement, and all three required CVVHD until death. Fourpatients survived for >1 month after VAD placement; all four had resolution ofrenal dysfunction with mean serum creatinine of 1.9 +/- 1.2 mg/dl (range 0.8 to3.6 mg/dl) without the need for renal support. Overall 30-day and six-monthsurvival after VAD placement, survival to transplantation, and survival one year post-transplantation were similar to patients without severe renal dysfunction.CONCLUSIONS: Contemporary use of VAD leads to resolution of severe renaldysfunction in most cardiogenic shock patients and comparable long-term outcomes to patients without renal dysfunction.