: 23781134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]417. Transplantation. 2013 Jun 27;95(12):1542-7. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e3182925242.Quantification, identification, and relevance of anti-human leukocyte antigenantibodies formed in association with the berlin heart ventricular assist device in children.O'Connor MJ(1), Harville TO, Rhodes-Clark B, Pye SE, Knecht KR, Imamura M,Frazier EA, Morrow WR.Author information: (1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences/ArkansasChildren's Hospital, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. mjoconnor@uams.eduBACKGROUND: Ventricular assist devices (VADs) are increasingly being used inpediatric patients to provide long-term cardiac support. One potentialcomplication of VAD therapy is the development of antibodies directed againsthuman leukocyte antigens (HLA). This phenomenon has not been well described with the Berlin Heart EXCOR VAD, the most commonly used VAD in pediatric patients.METHODS: The records of all pediatric patients undergoing VAD support using theBerlin Heart device at our institution between April 2005 and August 2011 werereviewed retrospectively. Demographic and clinical data regarding the VAD course were collected. Assessment of anti-HLA antibodies was performed using Luminex,and antibodies were quantified using mean fluorescence intensity (MFI).Assessment for anti-HLA antibodies was performed before VAD implantation and inserial fashion after VAD implantation. Clinically significant anti-HLA antibodies(sensitization) were defined by an MFI of more than 1000.RESULTS: Thirty-six patients were supported with the Berlin Heart VAD; 13 metinclusion criteria. The majority (85%) carried the diagnosis of dilatedcardiomyopathy. Evidence of sensitization pre-VAD was found in 69%; new-onsetsensitization (the development of new antibodies on VAD) occurred in 69%. Allpatients survived to transplantation. In two patients, the retrospectivecrossmatch was positive, but only in one patient was the crossmatch positive for antibodies formed while on VAD.CONCLUSIONS: Using Luminex and MFI quantification, anti-HLA antibodies are commonbefore VAD implantation in pediatric patients. While on VAD support, new anti-HLAantibodies formed in a majority, but the immediate impact of these antibodiesappears to be limited.