: 11052188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1787. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000 Nov;120(5):843-53.Midterm follow-up of patients who underwent removal of a left ventricular assist device after cardiac recovery from end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy.Hetzer R(1), Müller JH, Weng YG, Loebe M, Wallukat G.Author information: (1)Deutsches Herzzentrum, Berlin, Germany. hetzer@dhzb.deOBJECTIVE: Cardiac recovery in end-stage idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathyrecently occurred after temporary support with a left ventricular assist device. We report the case histories of patients who underwent removal of the device morethan 4 years ago.METHODS: Since June 1994, 23 patients with end-stage idiopathic dilatedcardiomyopathy who were supported by a left ventricular assist device orbiventricular assist device for 1 to 26 months (mean, 6 months) underwent removalof the device after complete or extensive cardiac recovery, as revealed byechocardiography.RESULTS: Seven patients (group A) had recurrent cardiac failure after 4 to 24months. Transplantation was performed in 6 patients, and one died while on thewaiting list. Three patients died of noncardiac causes within a period of 4months and 3 days after removal of the assist device. Stable cardiac recoveryoccurred in 13 patients (group B) for 3 to 49 months (mean, 23 months). At thetime of implantation, there were no significant differences between the groupswith regard to age, hemodynamics, left ventricular ejection fraction, leftventricular internal diameter in diastole, and autoantibody levels. The increase of ejection fraction and the decrease of left ventricular internal diameter indiastole after 2 months were highly significant. The patients in group A hadlonger histories of heart failure and first cardiac symptoms and duration ofassist when compared with group B. Group B demonstrated a quicker cardiacrecovery on the assist device, and thus support was shorter. Also, the degree of recovery at assist device explantation was more complete in group B. The age atthe time of device placement was the only influencing factor for duration on the assist device. The probability of recurrence of heart failure was influenced bythe duration of heart failure.CONCLUSIONS: In selected patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy, lastingrecovery can be achieved after unloading with a left ventricular assist device.Lasting cardiac recovery seems to be related to functional normalization and amore rapid recovery during the unloading period.