: 23479562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]478. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013 May;32(5):569-73. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2013.01.1056. Epub 2013 Mar 7.Antithrombotic strategies in children receiving long-term Berlin Heart EXCORventricular assist device therapy.Rutledge JM(1), Chakravarti S, Massicotte MP, Buchholz H, Ross DB, Joashi U.Author information: (1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.jennifer.rutledge@albertahealthservices.caBACKGROUND: Thromboembolic events while receiving ventricular assist device (VAD)support remain a significant cause of morbidity and mortality despite standardanti-coagulation and anti-platelet therapies. The use of bivalirudin andepoprostenol infusions as an alternate anti-thrombotic (AT) regimen in pediatric VAD patients was reviewed.METHODS: This was a retrospective record review of 6 pediatric patients (aged ≤17years) at 2 institutions treated with bivalirudin and epoprostenol infusionswhile being supported with the Berlin Heart EXCOR (Berlin Heart GmbH, Berlin,Germany) VAD.RESULTS: Six patients (age, 0.8-14 years; weight, 6.7-29.7 kg) were treated.Diagnoses included cardiomyopathy in 2 and congenital heart disease in 4. VADsupport was left VAD in 2 and bi-VAD in 4, with duration of support of 21 to 155 days. Three patients required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation before VADsupport. Bivalirudin/epoprostenol was used after recurrent thromboses onconventional medication in 3 patients, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in 2, andin 1 patient considered high risk with a prosthetic mitral valve. The bivalirudindose was titrated to partial thromboplastin time (PTT) of 1.5- to 2-timesbaseline (0.1-0.8 mg/kg/hour); the epoprostenol dose was 2 to 10 ng/kg/min.Additional anti-platelet agents included acetylsalicylic acid, dipyridamole, and clopidogrel in 5 patients each. No bleeding complications occurred. One patientsustained a cerebrovascular infarct on therapy, with subsequent completerecovery. No other complications occurred. Five patients underwent successfultransplantation, and 1 patient died of multisystem organ failure.CONCLUSIONS: This report provides data on estimated safety and efficacy ofbivalirudin and epoprostenol as an AT strategy in pediatric patients on extended VAD support. The short drug half-life and predictable AT response facilitatedconversion to standard AT regimens at the time of transplantation(heparin-induced thrombocytopenia-negative patients). These agents should beconsidered for management of pediatric VAD patients when standard regimens fail.Copyright © 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.