: 11704478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1720. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2001 Dec;3(6):463-467.Idiopathic Giant Cell Myocarditis.Cooper LT(1), Okura Y.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine. Department of Internal Medicine, The MayoClinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Cooper.Leslie@mayo.eduIdiopathic giant cell myocarditis (IGCM) is an uncommon disorder that is ofgeneral importance because it most commonly affects young individuals, is usuallyfatal without treatment, and may respond to aggressive medical and surgicaltherapy. IGCM is most often progressive over days to weeks and frequentlyrequires the concurrent management of congestive heart failure, tachyarrhythmias,and heart block. After common causes of heart disease are excluded, the diagnosismust be confirmed by endomyocardial biopsy. Standard pharmacologic therapy forNew York Heart Association functional class II to III congestive heart failuredue to left ventricular systolic failure includes an angiotensin-convertingenzyme inhibitor, a beta-blocker such as carvedilol, and diuretics as needed. We avoid digoxin and reserve inotropic agents for patients whose circulatoryrequirements cannot be supported with standard oral vasodilators and diuretics.Heart block may require a temporary or permanent pacemaker. Ventriculartachycardia is common and usually is managed chronically with an implantablecardiac defibrillator and antiarrhythmic drugs such as amiodarone. Despiteoptimal medical management, mechanical support may be required as a temporarybridge to recovery or transplantation. The intra-aortic balloon pump andventricular assist device have been used successfully for patients withrefractory pump failure due to acute IGCM. Heart transplantation is efficacious, with a 71% 5-year survival, despite a 20% to 25% rate of histologic recurrence insurveillance endomyocardial biopsies. The role of aggressive immunosuppression aspart of the primary treatment of IGCM is under active investigation. Preliminary data suggest that primary therapy with a regimen that includes muromonab-CD3,cyclosporine, and steroids may significantly improve transplant-free survival.