: 16603577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1402. J Invasive Cardiol. 2006 Mar;18(3):93-6.Use of the TandemHeart percutaneous ventricular assist device to support patientsundergoing high-risk percutaneous coronary intervention.Kar B(1), Forrester M, Gemmato C, Civitello A, Loyalka P, Myers T, Reynolds D.Author information: (1)Cardiovascular Transplant Service and the Cardiovascular Research Laboratoriesof the Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas,USA.Comment in    J Invasive Cardiol. 2006 Mar;18(3):97-8.OBJECTIVES: We describe our experience in using the TandemHeart percutaneousventricular assist device (pVAD) during high-risk percutaneous coronaryintervention (PCI).BACKGROUND: Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is the preferred treatment fordisease in an unprotected left main coronary artery or left main equivalent.However, severe comorbidities may preclude surgery in some patients. In thesecases, PCI is also often a high-risk procedure. The pVAD is designed to providecirculatory support during high-risk PCI.METHODS AND RESULTS: We used the pVAD for hemodynamic support during PCI in 5consecutive patients who were ineligible for CABG because of severecomorbidities. In all 5 cases, the device was inserted and support initiatedwithout complications. Percutaneous revascularization was successfully performed with pVAD support (approximately 3 L per minute). Four patients were supportedfor an average of 107 minutes, the pVAD being withdrawn shortly after PCI; all 4 patients recovered uneventfully. The fifth patient required support for 48 morehours after the procedure because of poor ventricular function. He died of heart failure and severe mitral regurgitation 10 days after pVAD withdrawal.CONCLUSIONS: The pVAD may provide sufficient circulatory support for hemodynamic protection during high-risk PCI, thus improving morbidity and mortality andbroadening the therapeutic options for high-risk patients. Further investigation of this device is warranted.