: 9456233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1900. Herz. 1997 Oct;22(5):227-36.[Temporary mechanical left heart support. Recovery of heart function in patients with end-stage idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy].[Article in German]Müller J(1), Wallukat G, Weng YG, Dandel M, Spiegelsberger S, Semrau S, BrandesK, Bieda H, Hummel M, Loebe M, Meyer R, Hetzer R.Author information: (1)Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin.BACKGROUND: Implantation of a mechanical cardiac support system (MCSS) inpatients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC) may improve cardiacfunction and allow explantation of the device. Our experience now includes 13patients who have been "weaned" from MCSS and we report about the overall resultsof this treatment as well as the effects of ventricular unloading on cardiacfunction, anti-beta 1-adrenoceptor-autoantibody (A-beta 1-AAB) level and thedegree of myocardial fibrosis.METHODS: 13 patients with non-ischemic IDC who had been admitted here incardiogenic shock (CI < 1.61.min-1.m2, left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] < 16% and left ventricular internal diameter in diastole [LVIDd] > 68 mm) and whoall tested positive for A-beta 1-AABs were implanted with an uni-(12 patients) ora biventricular (1 patient) mechanical assist device. Echocardiographicevaluation and A-beta 1-AAB-level-monitoring was routinely performed afterimplantation and explantation of the MCSS and the degree of myocardial fibrosiswas assessed at the time of implantation and after explantation.RESULTS: During a mean duration of mechanical support of 236 +/- 201 days (range:30 to 794 days), LV-EF improved to a mean of 46% and LVIDd decreased to a meanvalue of 56 mm in these 13 patients. A-beta 1-AABs decreased and disappeared 11.7weeks after implantation of the device and did not reincrease thereafter. Thehighly pathologic degree of fibrosis at the time of implantation diminished tonormal values about 1 year after explantation. One patient died ofanesthesiologic complications and another patient shortly presented with a newepisode of cardiac insufficiency 6 months after explantation. He was implantedagain with an univentricular assist device was successfully transplanted 3 weeks later. Mean observation period of the remaining 11 patients now amounts to 12.6+/- 9.77 (range: 3 to 26) months after explantation of the device--as of May, 31,1997--with a cumulative observation period of 139 patient months.CONCLUSION: Temporary implantation of a MCSS may normalize cardiac function inselected patients with IDC. The striking degree of myocardial fibrosis can reduceto normal values after explantation of the device. A-beta 1-AABs disappear duringventricular unloading and do not increase thereafter. "Weaning" from mechanicaldevice may constitute an alternative treatment to cardiac transplantation inselected patients.