: 9124973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1934. Curr Probl Surg. 1997 Apr;34(4):317-86.The continuing evolution of mechanical ventricular assistance.Argenziano M(1), Oz MC, Rose EA.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center,Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons New York, New York, USA.A great number of patients suffer and die of the sequelae of acute and chronicheart failure each year. Although advances in medical and surgical therapy havebenefited many of these patients, most have disease that is refractory to anydefinitive therapy. For these patients cardiac transplantation is the onlyremaining hope. Unfortunately, because of the increasing demand for donor organs in the face of a fixed and limited supply, this option is available to only asmall percentage of these patients. Even in patients accepted fortransplantation, a significant waiting list mortality has been observed. Avariety of VADs have been developed since the first successful case of mechanicalcardiac assistance more than 30 years ago. These devices differ in basicmechanical function, method of insertion, and degree of implantability and thushave different indications and potential applications. Whereas the intraaorticballoon pump and centrifugal pumps are effective short-term support modalities,extracorporeal and implantable pulsatile devices have been used successfully for long-term support of patients with reversible and nonreversible cardiac failure. Although these pumps have most commonly been used as bridges to transplantation, increasing clinical experience has supported the notion of long-term mechanicalassistance as a definitive therapy for patients with end-stage heart disease.Although complications, particularly infection and thromboembolism, posesignificant challenges and long-term device reliability remains to be fullydetermined, available implantable devices appear to be capable of providingeffective long-term support. As data are obtained from currently ongoing trialscomparing VAD support with medical therapy for end-stage heart failure, ethicaland economic issues will assume increasing importance.