: 10694622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1826. Cardiovasc Surg. 2000 Jan;8(1):1-9.Postoperative acute refractory right ventricular failure: incidence,pathogenesis, management and prognosis.Kaul TK(1), Fields BL.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Baptist Medical Center, Birmingham, Alabama,USA.Isolated acute refractory right ventricular failure is extremely uncommon. There are greater prospects of seeing a right dominant biventricular failure, as thetwo ventricular chambers are contiguous. The overall clinical spectrum isdetermined by the relative ischemic involvement of the right or left ventricle.The postoperative acute refractory right ventricular failure that develops after cardiotomy, heart transplant, or during a left ventricular assist device support,may have somewhat dissimilar elements of origin, but the resultant clinicalpicture and the management are essentially similar. In this collective review,the authors have summarized the incidence, pathogenesis, management and prognosisof postoperative acute refractory right ventricular failure, in adult cardiacsurgical practice. The incidence of post-cardiotomy acute refractory rightventricular failure ranges from 0.04 to 0.1%. Acute refractory right ventricular failure has also been reported in 2-3% patients after a heart transplant and inalmost 20-30% patients who receive a left ventricular assist device support. The main contributor to this problem is a disproportionate ischemic involvement ofthe right ventricle. Other pertinent contributors to this problem are pulmonaryhypertension and an altered interventricular balance. The latter component ispredominant in recipients of a left ventricular assist device support.Postoperative acute refractory right ventricular failure has been successfullymanaged with conventional pulmonary vasodilators, mechanical support with apulmonary artery balloon pump, a right ventricular assist device, orcavopulmonary diversion. Unfortunately, the reported initial salvage rate is only25-30%. This problem is often underestimated. Support measures are often started late or terminated prematurely. These factors have contributed to a poor initial salvage rate in this group of patients.