: 24622121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]227. JACC Heart Fail. 2013 Oct;1(5):382-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jchf.2013.06.002. Epub 2013 Sep 11.Percutaneous placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump in the leftaxillary/subclavian position provides safe, ambulatory long-term support asbridge to heart transplantation.Estep JD(1), Cordero-Reyes AM(2), Bhimaraj A(2), Trachtenberg B(2), Khalil N(2), Loebe M(3), Bruckner B(3), Orrego CM(2), Bismuth J(3), Kleiman NS(2),Torre-Amione G(4).Author information: (1)The Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, Department of Cardiology,Houston, Texas. Electronic address: jestep@houstonmethodist.org. (2)The MethodistDeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, Department of Cardiology, Houston, Texas. (3)TheMethodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, Department of Surgery, Houston, Texas.(4)The Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, Department of Cardiology,Houston, Texas; Catedra de Cardiologia y Medicina Vascular, Escuela de Medicina, Tecnologico de Monterrey, Monterrey, Mexico.OBJECTIVES: This study evaluated the feasibility, tolerability, and efficacy of astrategy for percutaneous intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) placement through the left axillary-subclavian artery to provide mechanical circulatory support inpatients with end-stage heart failure as a bridge to heart transplantation.BACKGROUND: The transfemoral approach to IABP placement is associated with major disadvantages, including the risk for infection and limitation of patientmobility in those requiring extended support.METHODS: We developed a percutaneous technique for placing IABPs in the leftaxillary artery that permits upright sitting and ambulation. We performed aretrospective review of data from patients who had undergone left axillary IABPimplantation between 2007 and 2012.RESULTS: Fifty patients who received a left axillary IABP as a bridge totransplantation were identified, of whom 42 (84%) underwent heart orheart-multiorgan transplantation. Cumulative survival on IABP support was 92%,and post-transplant 90-day survival was 90%. Median duration of support was 18days. Four of 50 patients (8%) died while on IABP support, and 3 (6%) receivedgreater mechanical circulatory support. Four patients (8%) had clinicallysignificant thromboembolic or bleeding events without long-term sequelae. Themost common minor adverse event was IABP malposition, in 22 patients (44%).Prolonged IABP support in the heart-transplantation cohort was associated withsignificant improvements in mean pulmonary artery pressure and in creatinine and total bilirubin concentrations.CONCLUSIONS: Percutaneous insertion of an IABP through the left axillary arteryis a feasible and relatively well-tolerated strategy to bridge patients withend-stage heart failure to heart transplantation. This form of mechanical-device treatment permits upright sitting and ambulation in those requiring extendedsupport.Copyright © 2013 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by ElsevierInc. All rights reserved.