: 11845872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1705. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002 Feb;73(2):538-45.Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support for adult postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock.Ko WJ(1), Lin CY, Chen RJ, Wang SS, Lin FY, Chen YS.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei.BACKGROUND: Postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock occasionally develops in patientswho have undergone cardiac procedures. We report our experience usingextracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in adult patients with postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock, and analyze the factors that affected outcomes for these ECMO patients.METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of ECMO patients.RESULTS: From August 1994 to May 2000, 76 adult patients (48 men, 28 women; mean age, 56.8+/-15.9 years) received ECMO support for postcardiotomy cardiogenicshock at the National Taiwan University Hospital. The mean ECMO blood flow was2.53+/-0.84 L/min. The cardiac operations included coronary artery bypassgrafting (n = 37), coronary artery bypass grafting and valvular operation (n =6), valvular operation alone (n = 14), heart transplantation (n = 12), correctionof congenital heart defects (n = 3), implantation of a left ventricular assistdevice (n = 2), and aortic operations (n = 2). Fifty-four patients received ECMO support after intraaortic balloon pumping, but 22 patients directly received ECMOsupport. Two patients were bridged to heart transplantation and two bridged toventricular assist devices. Thirty patients died on ECMO support. The causes ofmortality included brain death (n = 3), refractory arrhythmia (n = 2), nearmotionless heart (n = 2), acute graft rejection (n = 1), primary graft failure (n= 1), uncontrolled bleeding (n = 5), and multiple organ failure (n = 16).Twenty-two patients were weaned off ECMO support but presented intrahospitalmortality. The cause of mortality included brain death (n = 1), sudden death (n =4), and multiple organ failure (n = 17). Twenty patients were weaned off ECMOsupport and survived to hospital discharge. During the follow-up of 33+/-22months, all were in New York Heart Association functional status I or II excepttwo cases of late deaths. Among the ECMO-weaned patients, "dialysis for acuterenal failure" was a significant factor in reducing the chance of survival.CONCLUSIONS: The ECMO provided a satisfactory partial cardiopulmonary support to patients with postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock, and allowed time for cliniciansto assess the patients and make appropriate decisions.