: 11845871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1706. J Heart Valve Dis. 2002 Jan;11 Suppl 1:S26-31.Mitral reconstruction in cardiomyopathy.Bolling SF(1).Author information: (1)Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan, USA.Functional mitral regurgitation (MR) is a significant complication of end-stagecardiomyopathy, and may affect most heart failure patients as a pre-terminal orterminal event as it develops secondary to a change in the annular-ventricularapparatus and altered ventricular geometry; this results in incomplete leafletcoaptation.. Historically, surgery in MR patients was mitral valve replacement,but the adverse effects on LV systolic function of interrupting annulus-papillarymuscle continuity was poorly understood. At the University of Michigan(1993-2000), 140 patients with end-stage cardiomyopathy and refractory MRunderwent mitral valve repair with an undersized flexible annuloplasty ring. All were in NYHA class III/IV despite receiving maximal medical therapy, and hadsevere LV systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction (EF) <25%). Overall operativemortality was 5%. There were five 30-day mortalities (one intraoperative deathdue to right ventricular failure, one cardiac failure, one stroke, twomultisystem organ failure). Five patients required intra-aortic balloon pump IABPsupport, but no patients required a LV assist device. Mean follow up was 38months (range: 1-68 months); one- and two-year actuarial survival was 80% and70%, respectively. There were 26 late deaths. At postoperative echocardiographythe mean transmitral gradient was 3 +/- 1 mmHg (range: 2-6 mmHg). At two-yearfollow up, all patients were in NYHA class I/II, with mean EF 26%. NYHA class wasimproved in all patients, and all reported subjective improvement in functionalstatus. Improvements were shown in LV EF, cardiac output, and end-diastolicvolumes, with reduced sphericity index and regurgitant fraction. Thoughsignificant undersizing of the mitral annulus was used to over-correct for thezone of coaptation, no mitral stenosis was induced, nor was any systolic anteriormotion (SAM) noted. SAM was avoided due to widening of the aortomitral angle and increased LV size seen in myopathic patients. In conclusion, surgical therapiesof heart failure are rapidly expanding and evolving. As a result of improvements in preoperative selection, intraoperative techniques and postoperative care, highmortality and morbidity after surgical intervention in patients with end-stageheart disease no longer apply. By combining operative techniques with optimalmedical management of heart failure, good outcome can avoid or postponetransplantation. This strategy will help to preserve the limited number of donor organs for those patients with no other surgical or medical alternatives.