: 25087103  [PubMed - in process]133. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2014 Nov;19(5):738-42. doi:10.1093/icvts/ivu236. Epub 2014 Aug 1.Simple and non-invasive techniques to evaluate the function of CircuLite Synergy.Mohite PN(1), Bowles CT(1), Sabashnikov A(2), Popov AF(1), Patil NP(1), SáezDG(1), Banner NR(1), Simon AR(1).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation and Mechanical CirculatorySupport, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.(2)Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation and Mechanical CirculatorySupport, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UKa.sabashnikov@rbht.nhs.uk.OBJECTIVES: The Synergy CircuLite micropump is a novel partial-support miniature left ventricular assist device that propels 2-3 l/min blood from the left atrium into the right subclavian artery. The ability of currently availableinvestigative modalities to confirm Synergy pump malfunction is limited. TheSynergy speed fluctuates periodically (at 10-s intervals) from the baseline to a transient decrease followed by a transient increase (alternating speed algorithm,ASA) with the purpose of changing the blood flow behaviour, thereby reducingthrombogenicity. The aim of this study was to develop a simple non-invasivemonitoring technique to assess pump function based on the detection of the ASA inthe peripheral microcirculation.METHODS: Between February 2012 and July 2013, 10 patients with advanced chronicheart failure underwent Synergy implantation at our institution. The pumpfunction was assessed by echocardiography and invasive monitoring according tostandard protocols; additionally, the pump speed and power consumption weremonitored. During the pump function assessment, the pulse oximeter waveform wasrecorded from the index fingers of the left and right hand with simultaneous pumpauscultation using a stethoscope positioned on the pump (right infra-clavicularpocket).RESULTS: The pulse oximeter waveform was readily detectable from the right andleft hand of all study patients. If the Synergy function was normal, there was a significant difference in the morphology of the pulse oximeter waveform from eachhand: the ASA algorithm produced a more pronounced variation (giant wave) in the trace from the right hand than from the left. The giant waves invariablycoincided with the sound variation associated with the ASA algorithms, which weredetected regularly at 10-s intervals.CONCLUSIONS: We describe a simple, readily applicable, inexpensive, non-invasive technique that allows evaluation of Synergy pump function and may have diagnosticutility under conditions of suspected pump thrombus/malfunction. This techniqueis readily applicable from the early post-implant period throughout support andallows clinical personnel to verify blood flow variation through the Synergy,thereby providing a novel method of assessing device function.© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.