: 23538380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]468. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2013 Sep-Oct;22(5):408-15. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2013.02.002.Epub 2013 Mar 20.A brief review of ventricular assist devices and a recommended protocol forpathology evaluations.Carpenter BA(1), Gonzalez CJ, Jessen SL, Moore EJ, Thrapp AN, Weeks BR, Clubb FJ Jr.Author information: (1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cardiovascular Pathology Laboratory,College of Veterinary Medicine, 4467 Texas A&M University, College Station, TX77843, USA.Heart failure is a leading cause of death in human populations, and as peoplelive longer, it is becoming an increasingly prominent problem. Because of theinsufficient numbers of donor hearts, physicians and engineers are turning tomechanical circulatory support in the form of ventricular assist devices (VADs). Their clinical performance and increasing availability of various types, sizes,and functions are increasing VAD recognition. However, for any implantablemedical device, especially one that is life supporting, performance and safetymust be evaluated both pre- and postmarket. It has been demonstrated thatspecific pathology analysis can provide unique and important information toaugment the evaluation of performance and safety. To help ensure the safety andefficacy of a device, we propose that regulatory agencies include pathologyanalysis by experienced, independent pathologists with relevant expertise as anintegral component of device submissions. We believe that this analysis shouldinclude both gross and microscopic components and, when warranted, supplementary data obtained through radiography, electron microscopy, or both. The pathologydata acquired through these analyses should be correlated with clinical data toyield a more thorough data set for submission to the governing regulatory body.Submitting this coordinated analysis of data will demonstrate to regulatoryagencies (United States Food and Drug Administration, Therapeutic GoodsAdministration, Brazilian Health Surveillance Agency, etc.) that the devicemanufacturer shares their objective: making medical devices as safe and effectiveas possible.SUMMARY: This review of ventricular assist devices introduces arecommended protocol for pathology evaluations of devices from organizations orresearchers seeking approval by a governing regulatory agency.Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.