: 10452341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1851. Acad Emerg Med. 1999 Jul;6(7):700-7.Extracorporeal resuscitation of cardiac arrest.Younger JG(1), Schreiner RJ, Swaniker F, Hirschl RB, Chapman RA, Bartlett RH.Author information: (1)Extracorporeal Life Support Service, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.jyounger@umich.eduComment in    Acad Emerg Med. 1999 Jul;6(7):677-8.OBJECTIVE: Extracorporeal support of heart and lung function (venoarterialperfusion) during cardiac arrest (ECPR) has been advocated as a means ofimproving survival following cardiac arrest. The authors retrospectively reviewedtheir institution's seven-year experience with this intervention.METHODS: Emergency department patients and inpatients in cardiac arrest orimmediately postarrest were considered candidates. ECPR was instituted usingvenoarterial bypass and was continued until patients regained sufficientcardiopulmonary function to allow weaning from the device or until theircondition was deemed irrecoverable.RESULTS: ECPR was attempted in 25 patients and successfully instituted in 21.Four patients (16%) were converted from ECPR to ventricular assist devices, twoof whom survived and await transplantation. Seven additional patients weredischarged from the hospital, resulting in an overall survival of 36%. Becausenone of the children treated survived, there was a trend toward higher age among survivors (survivors 40 +/- 14 yr, nonsurvivors 33 +/- 15 yr, p = 0.29). Theduration of conventional CPR was shorter among survivors (survivors 21 +/- 16min, nonsurvivors 43 +/- 32 min, p = 0.04), as was the duration of extracorporealsupport (survivors 44 +/- 21 hr, nonsurvivors 87 +/- 96 hr, p = 0.18). Survivalwas seen only in patients whose conditions were amenable to a definitivetherapeutic intervention, particularly cardiac arrest due to respiratory orpulmonary embolic disease. While four of the five patients treated in the ED weresuccessfully supported, none survived to discharge.CONCLUSION: In select patients with reversible disease, extracorporeal CPR can beused to successfully treat cardiac arrest. Further investigation into its mostappropriate application is warranted.