: 8998278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1961. Artif Organs. 1996 Aug;20(8):964-70.Management of acute fulminant myocarditis using circulatory support systems.Reiss N(1), el-Banayosy A, Posival H, Morshuis M, Minami K, Körfer R.Author information: (1)Clinic for Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Ruhr University of Bochum, BadOeynhausen, Germany.Although the natural history of acute myocarditis leads to complete recovery inthe majority of patients, rapid and irreversible cardiac decompensation resultingin death is known to occur. One possible therapy to improve the poor prognosis ofthis patient group may be the implantation of circulatory support systems thatallow myocardial recovery or bridging to heart transplantation. Therapeuticprotocols have been suggested, but clinical experiences in this area are few. In this paper we report on our clinical experiences in cardiogenic shock after acutefulminant myocarditis using different types of circulatory support systems. Threedifferent systems were used: a biomedicus centrifugal pump as a ventricularassist device (VAD) or femoro-femoral bypass (FFB) including oxygenator; Abiomed BVS 5000, and Thoratec ventricular assist device. Hemodynamic criteria forimplantation of support systems were cardiac index < 2.0 L/min/m2. SVR = 1000dyne-s-cm-5, central venous pressure (CVP) or left atrial pressure (LAP) > 20 mm Hg, and urine output < 20 ml/h despite maximal pharmacological therapy. Age totalof 5 patients (mean age 29 years, range 15-55 years) in cardiogenic shock afteracute fulminant myocarditis were included. Two patients initially were supported for stabilization and transportation from an outside hospital by FFB. Bothpatients died after a support time of 24 h because of multiorgan failure orneurological disorders after longer periods of resuscitation in the referralhospital. The third patient (55 years) received the Biomedicus pump as CVAD.Myocardial function recovered after a support time of 120 h, and the patientcould be weaned. Unfortunately, 2 days after weaning, he developed malignantarrhythmias and died. The 2 remaining patients (15 years and 27 years) withdiagnosis of acute fulminant virus myocarditis were supported by biventricularassist device (1 x Thoratec/111 days, 1 x Abiomed/7 days). During the entire timeof support, there were no signs of myocardial recovery. The patients wereaccepted for the heart transplantation (HTX) program. In both cases, HTXs wereperformed without any complication. The postoperative course was uneventful. The results of mechanical circulatory support in patients with acute fulminantmyocarditis are encouraging and justify the resources.