: 12434598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1664. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2002 Nov;21(11):1218-24.HLA alloimmunization in patients requiring ventricular assist device support.McKenna DH Jr(1), Eastlund T, Segall M, Noreen HJ, Park S.Author information: (1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of MinnesotaMedical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. mcken020@umn.eduBACKGROUND: Ventricular assist devices (VADs) are often necessary to maintaincirculation in patients with heart failure prior to cardiac transplantation.However, the use of such devices has been reported to be associated with a highincidence of development of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies, dueperhaps, according to some investigators, to immune-activating properties of the VAD itself. We looked at HLA antibody formation in our patients during VADsupport to determine the rate and potential causes of antibody formation.METHODS: Between 1995 and 2000, 54 patients were placed on a VAD at ourinstitution. We reviewed clinical and blood transfusion history and HLA antibody testing of the 29 patients without HLA antibodies prior to implantation. HLAantibody testing was performed by an anti-globulin-augmented cytotoxicity method or by a commercial enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) kit.RESULTS: Eight of 29 patients (28%) developed HLA antibodies. Patients whodeveloped HLA antibodies after VAD implantation received significantly more totalperi- and post-operative transfusions than did those who remained negative (99transfusions vs 34 transfusions, p = 0.0014). Within this small study group,gender, age, etiology of heart failure, previous cardiac surgery and duration of VAD support showed no statistically significant correlation with formation of HLAantibodies.CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that HLA alloimmunization during VAD support may bedue to extensive blood transfusion. The rate of HLA alloimmunization does notappear to be greater than that reported in other populations of multi-transfused patients. Leukoreduction of cellular components, as well as plasma, or otherinitiatives is needed to reduce the rate of alloimmunization and, potentially,the wait to transplantation.