: 25863737  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]18. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015 Apr 14;65(14):1424-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.01.042.Mechanisms of Bone Marrow-Derived Cell Therapy in Ischemic Cardiomyopathy WithLeft Ventricular Assist Device Bridge to Transplant.Stempien-Otero A(1), Helterline D(2), Plummer T(2), Farris S(2), Prouse A(2),Polissar N(3), Stanford D(3), Mokadam NA(4).Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington. Electronic address: april@uw.edu. (2)Department of Medicine,University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington. (3)TheMountain-Whisper-Light Statistics, Seattle, Washington. (4)Department of Surgery,University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington.BACKGROUND: Clinical trials report improvements in function and perfusion withdirect injection of bone marrow cells into the hearts of patients with ischemiccardiomyopathy. Preclinical data suggest these cells improve vascular density,which would be expected to decrease fibrosis and inflammation.OBJECTIVES: The goal of this study was to test the hypothesis that bone marrowstem cells (CD34+) will improve histological measurements of vascularity,fibrosis, and inflammation in human subjects undergoing left ventricular assistdevice (LVAD) placement as a bridge to cardiac transplantation.METHODS: Subjects with ischemic cardiomyopathy who were scheduled for placementof an LVAD as a bridge to transplantation underwent bone marrow aspiration theday before surgery; the bone marrow was processed into cell fractions (bonemarrow mononuclear cells, CD34+, and CD34-). At LVAD implantation, all fractions and a saline control were injected epicardially into predetermined areas and eachinjection site marked. At the time of transplantation, injected areas werecollected. Data were analyzed by paired Student t test comparing the effect ofcell fractions injected within each subject.RESULTS: Six subjects completed the study. There were no statisticallysignificant differences in complications with the procedure versus controlsubjects. Histological analysis indicated that myocardium injected with CD34+cells had decreased density of endothelial cells compared to saline-injectedmyocardium. There were no significant differences in fibrosis or inflammationbetween groups; however, density of activated fibroblasts was decreased in bothCD34+ and CD34- injected areas.CONCLUSIONS: Tissue analysis does not support the hypothesis that bonemarrow-derived CD34+ cells promote increased vascular tissue in humans withischemic cardiomyopathy via direct injection.Copyright © 2015 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by ElsevierInc. All rights reserved.