: 25549810  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]59. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015 Apr;34(4):509-15. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2014.10.007. Epub 2014 Nov 4.A novel pediatric treatment intensity score: development and feasibility in heartfailure patients with ventricular assist devices.May LJ(1), Ploutz M(2), Hollander SA(3), Reinhartz O(4), Almond CS(3), Chen S(3),Maeda K(4), Kaufman BD(3), Yeh J(3), Rosenthal DN(3).Author information: (1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics. Electronicaddress: ljmay@stanford.edu. (2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department ofPediatrics, Children's National Health System, Washington, DC. (3)Division ofPediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics. (4)Division of Pediatric Cardiac Surgery, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford University, Palo Alto,California.BACKGROUND: The evolution of pharmacologic therapies and mechanical supportincluding ventricular assist devices (VADs) has broadened the scope of careavailable to children with advanced heart failure. At the present time, there areonly limited means of quantifying disease severity or the concomitant morbidityfor this population. This study describes the development of a novel pediatrictreatment intensity score (TIS), designed to quantify the burden of illness andclinical trajectory in children on VAD support.METHODS: There were 5 clinical domains assessed: nutrition, respiratory support, activity level, cardiovascular medications, and care environment. A scale wasdeveloped through expert consensus. Higher scores indicate greater morbidity asreflected by intensity of medical management. To evaluate feasibility and facevalidity, the TIS was applied retrospectively to a subset of pediatric inpatientswith VADs. The Bland-Altman method was used to assess limits of agreement.RESULTS: The study comprised 39 patients with 42 implantations. Bland-Altmaninterobserver and intraobserver comparisons showed good agreement (meandifferences in scores of 0.02, limits of agreement ±0.12). Trends in TIS wereconcordant with the overall clinical impression of improvement. Scores remained≥0.6 preceding VAD implantation and peaked at 0.71 3 days after VAD implantation.CONCLUSIONS: We describe a pediatric VAD scoring tool, to assess global patientmorbidity and clinical recovery. We demonstrate feasibility of using this TIS in a test population of inpatients on VAD support.Copyright © 2015 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.