: 15073458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1549. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2004 Apr;23(4):396-404.The structural examination of myocardial samples from patients with end-stageheart failure supported by ventricular assist devices using electron microscopyand amino acid analysis reveals low degree of reverse remodeling.Milting H(1), Jacob M, Kassner A, Heimann P, Mannherz HG, Becker G, Meyer HE,Böthig D, Arusoglu L, Morshuis M, Körfer R, El Banayosy A.Author information: (1)Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Herz- und Diabeteszentrum NRW, Forschungslabor derHerzchirurgie, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany. hmilting@hdz-nrw.deBACKGROUND: Chronic heart failure is a multifactorial, progressive disease ofmany causes and is associated with complex ventricular remodeling. Deposition of extracellular matrix proteins and sarcomeric disarray of the myocytes occur inend-stage heart failure. Ventricular assist devices (VAD), implanted as bridge totransplantation, may reverse ventricular remodeling. Although successfullyweaning patients from VAD support has been reported, it is not clear to whatdegree reversal of remodeling occurs in unloaded failing hearts. Because collagendeposition and ultrastructural disarray are hallmarks of myocardial remodeling,we analyzed the myocardial ultrastructure and collagen content of VAD-supportedhearts before and after mechanical unloading.METHODS: We used amino acid analysis to measure collagen content(4-hydroxyproline content) in 24 transplant candidates receiving VAD support. We used transmission electron microscopy to examine the ultrastructure in 6 patientsreceiving VAD support.RESULTS: The 4-hydroxyproline content increased significantly at VAD implantationand was not altered by mechanical unloading. The ultrastructure showed signs ofpersisting cardiomyopathy.CONCLUSION: Mechanical unloading does not alter the total collagen content of thesupported, failing heart. Thus, structural reversal of the remodeling processassociated with heart failure is not a general phenomenon in mechanicallyunloaded hearts.