: 24239003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]328. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Apr;33(4):366-71. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2013.10.003. Epub 2013 Oct 4.In vivo evaluation of the HeartWare MVAD Pump.McGee E Jr(1), Chorpenning K(2), Brown MC(2), Breznock E(3), Larose JA(2), Tamez D(2).Author information: (1)Bluhm Cardiovascular Institute, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, NorthwesternUniversity School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois. Electronic address:emcgee@nmh.org. (2)HeartWare Inc, Framingham, Massachusetts. (3)BioSurg Inc,Winters, California.OBJECTIVE: The current design trend for left ventricular assist devices (LVADs)is miniaturization, which aims to increase the treatable patient population andenable new treatment indications by reducing surgical trauma and thecomplications associated with device implantation. The MVAD Pump (HeartWare Inc, Framingham, MA) is a small, axial VAD that uses magnetic and hydrodynamicimpeller technology and incorporates wide helical flow channels to minimize shearstress. In this study, we implanted the MVAD Pump in an ovine model to evaluatedevice hemocomaptiblity, biocompatibility, performance, and safety.METHODS: The MVAD Pump was implanted in an ovine model (n = 9) for 90 days. Thepump was implanted through a thoracotomy and secured to the LV apex with agimbaled sewing ring, which allowed for intraoperative adjustment of theinsertion depth and angle of the inflow cannula. Serum analytes and coagulationparameters were analyzed at specific intervals throughout the study period. Pump flow, speed, and power were recorded daily to monitor device performance. Sheepwere electively euthanized at 90 days for pathologic and histologic analysis.RESULTS: In this study, results demonstrated the safety, reliability,hemocompatability, and biocompatibility of the MVAD Pump. Nine animals wereimplanted for 90 ± 5 days. No complications occurred during surgicalimplantation. Seven of the 9 animals survived until elective sacrifice. Eachsheep that survived to the scheduled explant appeared physically normal, with no signs of cardiovascular or other organ compromise. The 2 sheep that wereeuthanized early showed no evidence of device-related issues.CONCLUSIONS: The MVAD Pump was successfully implanted through a thoracotomy anddemonstrated excellent hemodynamic support with no device malfunctions throughoutthe study period.© 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Published byInternational Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation All rights reserved.