: 23149497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]539. Circ Heart Fail. 2013 Jan;6(1):145-50. doi: 10.1161/HHF.0b013e318279f55d. Epub2012 Nov 12.Statement regarding the pre and post market assessment of durable, implantableventricular assist devices in the United States: executive summary.Acker MA(1), Pagani FD, Stough WG, Mann DL, Jessup M, Kormos R, Slaughter MS,Baldwin T, Stevenson L, Aaronson KD, Miller L, Naftel D, Yancy C, Rogers J,Teuteberg J, Starling RC, Griffith B, Boyce S, Westaby S, Blume E, Wearden P,Higgins R, Mack M.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.The incorporation of complex medical device technologies into clinical practiceis governed by critical oversight of the US Food and Drug Administration. Thisregulatory process requires a judicious balance between assuring safety andefficacy, while providing efficient review to facilitate access to innovativetherapies. Recent contrasting views of the regulatory process have emphasized thedifficulties in obtaining an optimal balance. Mechanical circulatory support has evolved to become an important therapy for patients with advanced heart failurewith the advent of more durable, implantable ventricular assist devices. Theregulatory oversight of these new technologies has been difficult owing to thecomplexities of these devices, associated adverse event profile, and severity of illness of the intended patient population. Maintaining a regulatory environment to foster efficient introduction of safe and effective technologies is criticalto the success of ventricular assist device therapy and the health of patientswith advanced heart failure. Physicians representing key surgical and cardiology societies, and representatives from the Food and Drug Administration, NationalHeart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services,Interagency Registry of Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support, and industrypartners gathered to discuss relevant issues regarding the current regulatoryenvironment assessing ventricular assist devices. The goal of the meeting was to explore innovative ways to foster the introduction of technologically advanced,safe, and effective ventricular assist devices. The following summary reflectsopinions and conclusions endorsed by The Society of Thoracic Surgeons, AmericanAssociation for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, Heart FailureSociety of America, International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation, andthe Interagency Registry of Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support.