: 12957613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1598. Artif Organs. 2003 Sep;27(9):765-71.Artificial organs versus regenerative medicine: is it true?Nosé Y(1), Okubo H.Author information: (1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,TX 77030, USA. ynose@bcm.tmc.eduIndividuals engaged in the fields of artificial kidney and artificial heart have often mistakenly stated that "the era of artificial organs is over; regenerative medicine is the future." Contrarily, we do not believe artificial organs andregenerative medicine are different medical technologies. As a matter of fact,artificial organs developed during the last 50 years have been used as a bridgeto regeneration. The only difference between regenerative medicine and artificialorgans is that artificial organs for the bridge to regeneration promote tissueregeneration in situ, instead of outside the body (for example, vascularprostheses, neuroprostheses, bladder substitutes, skin prostheses, boneprostheses, cartilage prostheses, ligament prostheses, etc.). All of theseartificial organs are successful because tissue regeneration over a man-madeprosthesis is established inside the patient's body (artificial organs to supportregeneration). Another usage of the group of artificial organs for the bridge to regeneration is to sustain the functions of the patient's diseased organs during the regeneration process of the body's healthy tissues and/or organs. Thisparticular group includes artificial kidney, hepatic assist, respiratory assist, and circulatory assist. Proof of regeneration of these healthy tissues and/ororgans is demonstrated in the short-term recovery of end-stage organ failurepatients (artificial organs for bridge to regeneration). A third group ofartificial organs for the bridge to regeneration accelerates the regeneratingprocess of the patient's healthy tissues and organs. This group includesneurostimulators, artificial blood (red cells) blood oxygenators, andplasmapheresis devices, including hemodiafiltrators. So-called "therapeuticartificial organs" fall into this category (artificial organs to accelerateregeneration). Thus, almost all of today's artificial organs are useful in thebridge to regeneration of healthy natural tissues and organs. It does not matter whether these tissues are cultivated inside or outside the patient's body. Thus, we strongly believe in the need for joint development programs between artificialorgan technologies and regenerative medicine technologies. In particular, theimportance of using both man-made substitute organ technologies and naturaltissue-derived substitute organ technologies is stressed for improved medicalcare in the future.