: 25330851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]96. Pharmacotherapy. 2015 Jan;35(1):79-98. doi: 10.1002/phar.1501. Epub 2014 Oct 20.Thrombosis in continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices: pathophysiology,prevention, and pharmacologic management.Jennings DL(1), Weeks PA.Author information: (1)Nova Southeastern University, Ft. Lauderdale, Florida; Jackson MemorialHospital/Miami Transplant Institute, Miami, Florida.Continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices reduce short-term mortality andimprove quality of life in patients with end-stage heart failure. Unfortunately, device-related complications remain common, with many patients experiencingadverse events within the first year. New literature suggests that rates ofdevice-related thrombosis may be increasing since 2011, which is particularlytroublesome given that this pathology can result in a disabling stroke, organdamage, and death. In 2013, a group of practitioners in the field of mechanicalcirculatory support published a treatment algorithm based on their expertopinion. However, a comprehensive review of the pharmacotherapy of this conditionis lacking. A search of the literature revealed 20 separate publications of case reports or case series describing outcomes associated with the use of drugtherapy for suspected pump thrombosis. Each of these experiences was limited bysmall sample size, nonrandomized treatment allocation, and nonstandardizedmedication dosing. Data describing the outcomes of surgical versus medicalmanagement of device thrombosis are also sparse, with only three publishedreports identified. Based on the review of this limited literature, surgicalmanagement appears to be the preferred treatment modality, especially in thosewith organ hypoperfusion or hemodynamic instability. In patients ineligible forsurgery, pharmacotherapy options remain limited. Use of all drug classesdescribed in the literature for the HeartMate II device-fibrinolytics,glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, and direct thrombin inhibitors-was hindered by either marginal efficacy or bleeding. Based on historical experience withunfractionated heparin in patients under HeartMate II support, we recommend this agent as a possible option for those with suspected pump thrombosis in lieu ofsurgical device exchange. For the HeartWare HVAD, limited data suggest thatdirect intraventricular administration of alteplase may be an acceptabletreatment alternative. Additional research is clearly needed to further delineatethe role of pharmacotherapy and to identify the optimal agent for managing thispotentially life-threatening condition.© 2014 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.