: 23674362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]442. Cytokine. 2013 Aug;63(2):113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.04.021. Epub 2013 May10.Impact of normalization strategy on cardiac expression of pro-inflammatorycytokines: evaluation of reference genes in different human myocardial regionsafter Left Ventricular Assist Device support.Caselli C(1), D'Amico A, Caruso R, Cabiati M, Prescimone T, Cozzi L, Cannata A,Parodi O, Del Ry S, Giannessi D.Author information: (1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche CNR, Institute of Clinical Physiology,Laboratory of Cardiovascular Biochemistry, Pisa, Italy.OBJECTIVE: New device therapies have expanded the strategies for treating heartfailure (HF) patients. Unloading of the heart with a left ventricular assistdevice (LVAD) can lead to the reversal of many remodeling changes whoseunderlying mechanisms are not yet completely known. Molecular analysis might playa role in obtaining further insight into the regulatory mechanisms of thisprocess. A critical step in an RT-PCR study is the selection of reference genesfor data normalization. This study aimed to determine an optimal combination ofstably expressed reference genes in different regions of the human heart in orderto study the effects of LVAD implants on cardiac remodeling, and in particular tocheck their reliability on the evaluation of pro-inflammatory cytokineexpression.DESIGN AND METHODS: We validated nine of the most commonly used reference genesin human myocardium samples obtained at heart transplantation from patients with LVAD implant (n=30 from a total of six patients) and from heart transplant (HTfrom a total of seven patients) recipients as controls (n=35). Samples from both left (LV) and right (RV) ventricles were analyzed. The normalization strategy wastested by analyzing mRNA expression of IL-6, IL-8 and TNF-α, whose protein levelswere measured by immunometric assay.RESULTS: The most stable gene combinations changed according to the experimental groups (the LVAD and HT groups and the different myocardial regions). Consideringall the cardiac samples as a whole, the three most stably expressed genes werePPIA, RPL13A, and YWHAZ (M=0.70). Using the best normalization strategy, asignificant increase in IL-6, IL-8 mRNA expression was observed in LVAD samplescompared to HT (p<0.0001). Similar results were obtained by protein analysis.CONCLUSIONS: Our results underline the importance of always selecting referencegenes for the specific system studied. The most appropriate normalizationstrategy is of pivotal importance for understanding the molecular mechanismsassociated with the pathophysiology of HF, such as inflammation.Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.