: 23622609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]451. Artif Organs. 2013 Aug;37(8):704-11. doi: 10.1111/aor.12067. Epub 2013 Apr 29.Evaluation of inflow cannulation site for implantation of right-sided rotaryventricular assist device.Gregory SD(1), Pearcy MJ, Fraser J, Timms D.Author information: (1)Medical Device Domain, Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation,Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.shaun.gregory1@gmail.comRight heart dysfunction is one of the most serious complications followingimplantation of a left ventricular assist device, often leading to therequirement for short- or long-term right ventricular assist device (RVAD)support. The inflow cannulation site induces major hemodynamic changes and sothere is a need to optimize the site used depending on the patient's condition.Therefore, this study evaluated and compared the hemodynamic influence of rightatrial cannulation (RAC) and right ventricular cannulation (RVC) inflow sites. Anin vitro variable heart failure mock circulation loop was used to compare RAC andRVC in mild and severe biventricular heart failure (BHF) conditions. In thesevere BHF condition, higher ventricular ejection fraction (RAC: 13.6%, RVC:32.7%) and thus improved heart chamber and RVAD washout were observed with RVC,which suggested this strategy might be preferable for long-term support (i.e.,bridge-to-transplant or destination therapy) to reduce the risk of thrombusformation. In the mild BHF condition, higher pulmonary valve flow (RAC:3.33 L/min, RVC: 1.97 L/min) and lower right ventricular stroke work (RAC:0.10 W, RVC: 0.13 W) and volumes were recorded with RAC. These results indicatean improved potential for myocardial recovery, thus RAC should be chosen in this condition. This in vitro study suggests that RVAD inflow cannulation site should be chosen on a patient-specific basis with a view to the support strategy topromote myocardial recovery or reduce the risk of long-term complications.© 2013, Copyright the Authors. Artificial Organs © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.and International Center for Artificial Organs and Transplantation.