: 15173738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1529. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004 Jun;77(6):2103-10.Preclinical readiness testing of the Arrow International CorAide left ventricularassist system.Doi K(1), Golding LA, Massiello AL, Kopcak MW Jr, Gerhart RL, Schenk S, Inoue M, Ootaki Y, Fukamachi K.Author information: (1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation,Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist system technologies are currently beingdeveloped as effective alternatives to cardiac transplantation. In this study, invivo testing of the Arrow International CorAide left ventricular assist systemwas conducted to determine its preclinical readiness based on demonstrated systemperformance and biocompatibility.METHODS: Arrow International CorAide blood pump assemblies were implanted in 7calves for 1-month (n = 4) and 3-month (n = 3) durations without the use ofchronic anticoagulation therapy. Hemodynamic performance, physiologic pumpcontrol, end-organ function, and device-related adverse events were evaluatedduring the studies and at autopsy.RESULTS: Hemodynamics were stable in all cases with a mean pump flow of 4.1 +/-0.8 L/min and a mean arterial pressure of 101 +/- 4 mm Hg. In all calves, renaland hepatic function remained normal with no incidence of hemolysis, infection,bleeding, or embolism. The CorAide physiologic control algorithm demonstratedappropriate pump speed and flow adjustments in response to physiologicallyinduced inputs, and the system's external electronic components demonstrated nohardware or software malfunction. All 7 cases were sacrificed electively. Autopsyrevealed no sign of end-organ disease on gross and histologic examinations, andno device failure, malfunction, or mechanical wear of the pump blood-bearingsurfaces was found.CONCLUSIONS: The Arrow CorAide left ventricular assist system demonstratedeffective pump performance and good biocompatibility with no incidence ofdevice-related adverse events. This system has completed its preclinicalreadiness testing and is approved for clinical trials in Europe in 2003.