: 24746637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]197. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Aug;33(8):857-63. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2014.02.026. Epub 2014 Feb 26.Right ventricular unloading and respiratory support with a wearable artificialpump-lung in an ovine model.Liu Y(1), Sanchez PG(2), Wei X(1), Li T(2), Watkins AC(2), Li SY(2), GriffithBP(2), Wu ZJ(3).Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,Maryland, USA; Department of Cardiac Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth MilitaryMedical University, Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Surgery, University ofMaryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; Departmentof Cardiac Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,China. Electronic address: zwu@smail.umaryland.edu.BACKGROUND: Device availability of mechanical circulatory or respiratory support to the right heart has been limited. The purpose of this study was to investigatethe effect of right heart unloading and respiratory support with a wearableintegrated artificial pump-lung (APL).METHODS: The APL device was placed surgically between the right atrium andpulmonary artery in 7 sheep. Anti-coagulation was performed with heparininfusion. The device's ability to unload the right ventricle (RV) wasinvestigated by echocardiograms and right heart catheterization at differentbypass flow rates. Hemodynamics and echocardiographic data were evaluated. APLflow and gas transfer rates were also measured at different device speeds.RESULTS: Hemodynamics remained stable during APL support. There was nosignificant change in systemic blood pressure and cardiac index. Central venouspressure, RV pressure, RV end-diastolic dimension and RV ejection fraction weresignificantly decreased when APL device flow rate approached 2 liters/min. Linearregression showed significant correlative trends between the hemodynamic andcardiac indices and device speed. The oxygen transfer rate increased with device speed. The oxygen saturation from the APL outlet was fully saturated (>95%)during support. The impact of APL support on blood elements (plasma freehemoglobin and platelet activation) was minimal.CONCLUSIONS: APL device support significantly unloaded the RV with increasingdevice speed. The device also provided stable hemodynamics and respiratorysupport in terms of blood flow and oxygen transfer. The right heart unloadingperformance of this wearable device needs to be evaluated further in an animalmodel of right heart failure with long-term support.Copyright © 2014 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.PMCID: PMC4112015 [Available on 2015-08-01]