: 22228845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]686. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012 Jun;41(6):1371-6; discussion 1376. doi:10.1093/ejcts/ezr233. Epub 2012 Jan 4.Does listing for heart transplant for longer than 30 days before ventricularassist device implantation influence utilization of psychotherapeutic support andoutcome?Heilmann C(1), Kuijpers N, Beyersdorf F, Trummer G, Berchtold-Herz M, Zeh W,Stroh AL, Fritzsche K.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery Freiburg, University Heart CenterFreiburg-Bad Krozingen, Freiburg, Germany. claudia.heilmann@uniklinik-freiburg.deOBJECTIVES: Previous studies indicate that patients with mechanical ventricularassist devices (VADs) experience high psychosocial and emotional distress.Listing for transplant may trigger psychosocial adjustment to the transplantationas an upcoming critical life-event. We hypothesized that patients could profitfrom this adaptation when implantation of a VAD becomes necessary.METHODS: We arbitrarily chose a cut-off at 30 days after being put on the hearttransplantation (HTX) waiting list. Eighteen patients were listed for HTX for >30days (referred to as 'listed') and 26 for shorter periods or not at all('non-listed'). Survival, the occurrence of mental disorders, the number ofcontacts of the patient with the psychologist and times spent onpsychotherapeutic support for both patient groups and for their families wereanalysed.RESULTS: Survival after VAD implantation (observation time) and mental disorders were comparable for listed and non-listed patients. Mental disorders weredeveloped in 80% of all patients irrespective of the listing group. Theutilization of supportive psychotherapy did not differ between the listed and thenon-listed group with regard to the number of contacts and to the time needed forindividual therapy. Moreover, the number of families who requested support didnot differ between the groups nor did the time spent on family therapy. However, the number of contacts and the time for individual psychotherapeutic supportcorrelated with the observation time, whereas the time spent on family therapydid not. In contrast, family therapy correlated inversely with age. In addition, we compared bridge-to-transplantation patients with destination therapy patients.There were no differences in the occurrence of mental disorders, the number ofcontacts or in the time expenses for individual and for family therapy, neitherfor all patients nor after stratification for listing.CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that listing for HTX for >30 days before VADimplantation does not reduce the utilization of psychotherapeutic support by VAD patients. We assume that structured emotional and psychosocial support by theinterdisciplinary VAD team, including professional supportive psychotherapy, isindispensable for successful coping of VAD patients and their families.