: 18640343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1189. Tex Heart Inst J. 2008;35(2):125-9.The TandemHeart as a bridge to a long-term axial-flow left ventricular assistdevice (bridge to bridge).Gregoric ID(1), Jacob LP, La Francesca S, Bruckner BA, Cohn WE, Loyalka P, Kar B,Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiopulmonary Transplantation and Mechanical CirculatorySupport, Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas77030, USA.End-stage heart-failure patients in acute refractory cardiogenic shock withmulti-organ dysfunction require aggressive medical therapy that includesinotropic support. Historically, the intra-aortic balloon pump was the lastoption for patients who were dying of acute cardiogenic shock. Short-termextracorporeal pulsatile or nonpulsatile cardiac assist devices or extracorporealmembrane oxygenation offered further treatment options; however, these therapies required invasive surgical procedures. Patients in this high-risk group hadincreased mortality rates from major procedures that required cardiopulmonarybypass. We used the TandemHeart, a percutaneously implanted device for short-termcardiac assistance, to lower the risk of death and improve hemodynamicperformance and end-organ perfusion before implanting long-term assist devices inselected patients with signs of profound cardiogenic shock. Nine end-stageheart-failure patients (mean age, 37.7 yr) in acute refractory hemodynamicdecompensation received a percutaneously implanted TandemHeart pump as a bridgeto an implantable axial-flow pump. To determine the relative risk for thesepatients, prognostic scores were calculated before and after insertion of theTandemHeart. Percutaneous support times ranged from 1 to 22 days (mean, 5.9 d).The mean cardiac index before support, 1.02 L/(min.m2) (range, 0.0-1.8L/[min.m2]) (0.0 L/[min.m2] implies active cardiopulmonary resuscitation),improved to 2.97 L/(min.m2) (range, 2.2-4.0 L/[min.m2]) during support. Threepatients underwent successful cardiac transplantation; 5 are currently supported by axial-flow pumps; and 1 died of complications unrelated to the axial-flowpump, after 587 days. End-organ function and overall condition improved uniformlyin our patients, thus decreasing the preoperative risk factors for implantationof the long-term device.PMCID: PMC2435454