: 23141906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]542. Swiss Med Wkly. 2012 Oct 18;142:w13701. doi: 10.4414/smw.2012.13701.Continuous flow left ventricular assist devices: a valid option for heart failurepatients.Carrel T(1), Englberger L, Martinelli MV, Takala J, Boesch C, Sigurdadottir V,Gygax E, Kadner A, Mohacsi P.Author information: (1)Clinic for Cardiovascular Surgery, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland.thierry.carrel@insel.chRecent outstanding clinical advances with new mechanical circulatory systems(MCS) have led to additional strategies in the treatment of end stage heartfailure (HF). Heart transplantation (HTx) can be postponed and for certainpatients even replaced by smaller implantable left ventricular assist devices(LVAD). Mechanical support of the failing left ventricle enables appropriatehemodynamic stabilisation and recovery of secondary organ failure, often seen in these severely ill patients. These new devices may be of great help to bridgepatients until a suitable cardiac allograft is available but are also discussedas definitive treatment for patients who do not qualify for transplantation. Mainindications for LVAD implantation are bridge to recovery, bridge totransplantation or destination therapy. LVAD may be an important tool forpatients with an expected prolonged period on the waiting list, for instancethose with blood group 0 or B, with a body weight over 90 kg and those withpotentially reversible secondary organ failure and pulmonary artery hypertension.However, LVAD implantation means an additional heart operation with inherentperi-operative risks and complications during the waiting period. Finally,cardiac transplantation in patients with prior implantation of a LVAD represents a surgical challenge. This review summarises the current knowledge about LVAD andcontinuous flow devices especially since the latter have been increasingly usedworldwide in the most recent years. The review is also based on the institutionalexperience at Berne University Hospital between 2000 and 2012. Apart fromshort-term devices (Impella, Cardiac Assist, Deltastream and ECMO) which wereused in approximately 150 cases, 85 pulsatile long-term LVAD, RVAD or bi-VAD and 44 non-pulsatile LVAD (mainly HeartMateII and HeartWare) were implanted. After aninitial learning curve, one-year mortality dropped to 10.4% in the last 58patients.