: 16826798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1374. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2006 Nov;101(5):1466-73. Epub 2006 Jul 6.In vitro endothelial cell activation and inflammatory responses in end-stageheart failure.Hoare GS(1), Birks EJ, Bowles C, Marczin N, Yacoub MH.Author information: (1)Imperial College London, Heart Science Centre, Royal Brompton and HarefieldHospital, Harefield, Middlesex UB9 6JH, UK.BACKGROUND: vascular endothelial cell activation and dysfunction are observed in patients with severe heart failure and may contribute to systemic manifestations of this syndrome. It remains unknown whether inflammatory activation of thesecells occurs in these patients because of increased circulating proinflammatorymediators.AIM: to determine whether the serum from patients with heart failure possesses a net proinflammatory bioactivity to active proinflammatory pathways in culturedendothelial cells.METHODS: serum was obtained from stable patients with end-stage heart failureundergoing elective cardiac transplantation (Tx) and severely decompensatedpatients with heart failure requiring emergency left ventricular assist device(LVAD) implantation. Net proinflammatory bioactivity of serum was investigated bymonitoring IkappaBalpha degradation and E-selectin expression in cultured humanpulmonary artery endothelial cells (HPAEC) following incubation with serumsamples. Serum cytokine concentrations were measured by ELISA and neutralizingantibodies were used to determine the role of specific factors in the observedbioactivity.RESULT: serum from both patient groups induced HPAEC IkappaBalpha degradation.Low basal HPAEC E-selectin expression significantly increased following treatmentwith Tx but not LVAD serum. Serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) andIL-10 concentrations were higher in patients with LVAD than those with Tx, andsoluble TNF-alpha receptor expression was high in both groups. Neither TNF-alpha nor IL-10 blocking experiments altered either bioassay result.CONCLUSION: activation of a specific profile of pro- and anti-inflammatorymediators is associated with heart failure resulting in HPAEC nuclear factor(NF)-kappaB activation. However, E-selectin expression is further regulated byunidentified factors. TNF-alpha is upregulated but appears to play no part inNFkappaB activation in these patients. These findings could have importanttherapeutic implications.