: 22300782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]673. Heart Lung Circ. 2012 Apr;21(4):218-20. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2011.12.003. Epub 2012Jan 30.Extra corporeal membrane oxygenation as right heart support following leftventricular assist device placement: a new cannulation technique.De Silva RJ(1), Soto C, Spratt P.Author information: (1)St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, Sydney 2010, New South Wales, Australia. ravijdesilva@doctors.org.ukExtracorporeal membrane oxygenation is an established treatment for acuterespiratory failure, or low cardiac output syndrome. This can be veno-venous, in which de-oxygenated blood is drained from the venous system and oxygenated beforebeing returned to the venous system, and veno-arterial where the re-oxygenatedvenous blood is returned to the arterial system. Haemorrhage, sepsis andthrombo-embolism are common and potentially lethal complications. Leftventricular assist devices are a continually evolving technology, that may beused as a bridge to transplantation or destination therapy in end-stage cardiacfailure. The VentrAssist™ left ventricular assist device is a small implantable, continuous flow centrifugal pump, that is controlled and powered by apercutaneous lead. However, in these patients, right heart failure may present asan acute event following weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), orpost-operatively in the intensive care unit. Patients who do not respond toinotropes and pulmonary vasodilators may need a right ventricular assist device(RVAD). We report a successful case of right heart assist extra corporealmembrane oxygenation used as temporary right heart support in combination with a VentrAssist™ left ventricular assist device. The use of right heart assist extra corporeal membrane oxygenation to help a failing right heart during leftventricular assist device placement is not new, however, our technique describes a novel method of cannulation of the femoral vein and pulmonary trunk via atunnelled vascular tube graft, which allows the chest to be closed whilst onright heart support, and decannulation to proceed without resternotomy. Thistechnique has also been used successfully subsequent to this.Copyright © 2012 Australian and New Zealand Society of Cardiac and ThoracicSurgeons (ANZSCTS) and the Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand (CSANZ). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.