: 16376778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1421. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005 Dec;24(12):2060-7. Epub 2005 Oct 14.Assessment of recurrent heart failure associated with left ventricular assistdevice dysfunction.Jaski BE(1), Miller DA, Hoagland PM, Gordon JB, Chillcott SR, Stahovich MJ,Adamson RM, Baradarian S, Dembitsky WP.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiology, San Diego Cardiac Center, Sharp Memorial Hospital,San Diego, California 92123, USA. bjaski@sdcardiac.comBACKGROUND: Patients with advanced heart failure may require long-term supportwith an intracorporeal left ventricular assist device (LVAD) before cardiactransplant, while awaiting myocardial recovery, or during destination therapy.Compared with the diagnosis of native heart dysfunction, there is less experiencewith the assessment of recurrent heart failure after LVAD placement.METHODS: Ten patients (9 men, 1 woman; age, 58 +/- 11 years) were studied afterLVAD placement. Six patients were studied because of recurrent heart failure; theremaining 4 had other indications for study and are reported here as controls.Cardiac catheterization, including LVAD and cannulae catheterization, andangiography were performed.RESULTS: Inflow cannula valve regurgitation by LVAD angiography was found in 3cases. Patients with regurgitation had a mean increased resting LVAD rate of 105 beats/min (range, 90-120); LVAD output exceeded forward cardiac output (LVAD -thermodilution cardiac output = +3.7 liters/min [0.6-6.4]). Inflow cannulaobstruction identified with a filling phase pressure gradient between the leftventricle and the LVAD was found in 3 additional patients. Patients withobstruction had decreased resting LVAD rates (50 beats/min, all patients); LVADoutput was less than the forward cardiac output (LVAD - thermodilution cardiacoutput = -2.3 liters/min [-0.8 to -3.5]). Compared with those with inflow valveregurgitation, patients with cannula obstruction had higher pulmonary capillarywedge pressures; phasic left ventricular pressure variation was reduced. Patientswith cannula dysfunction underwent surgical intervention, and 4 of 6 werelong-term survivors.CONCLUSIONS: When heart failure recurs after LVAD placement, abnormalities of theinflow cannula are common. Cardiac catheterization can confirm the diagnosisbefore surgical intervention. Hemodynamic coupling between the left ventricle andthe LVAD is increased with inflow valve regurgitation and reduced with cannulaobstruction.