: 16106119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1457. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005 Aug;80(2):548-52.CardioWest total artificial heart: Bad Oeynhausen experience.El-Banayosy A(1), Arusoglu L, Morshuis M, Kizner L, Tenderich G, Sarnowski P,Milting H, Koerfer R.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovasular Surgery, Heart Center NorthRhine-Westphalia, Ruhr University Bochum, Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.abanayosy@hdz-nrw.deBACKGROUND: The use of ventricular assist devices (VAD) has become a widelyaccepted therapeutic option. However, there are still limitations to the patient collective eligible for VAD placement, who might therefore benefit from theimplantation of a total artificial heart. We present the first Germansingle-center experience with the CardioWest total artificial heart (TAH)(SynCardia Systems, Tucson, AZ) in 42 patients.METHODS: Between February 2001 and December 2003, 42 patients (37 men, 5 women,mean age 51 +/- 13 years) received a TAH at our Center. Their body surface arearanged between 1.5 and 2.4 (mean, 1.9 +/- 0.19) m2. All patients were inpersistent cardiogenic shock in spite of maximum inotropic support and hadnumerous preoperative risk factors (intraaortic balloon pumping, mechanicalventilation, acute renal failure, previous cardiac surgery, recentcardiopulmonary resuscitation).RESULTS: Duration of support was 1 to 291 days. Eleven patients (26%) underwentsuccessful transplantation; 9 of them could be discharged home. Twenty-twopatients died under support, 21 of them from multiple organ failure and 1 patientfrom a technical problem. Nine patients are still on the device, 4 of them athome after the original CardioWest console was replaced by the Berlin Heart EXCORdriver (Berlin Heart, Berlin, Germany). Exceptional results were achieved inpatients with cardiogenic shock after cardiac surgery or after acute myocardialinfarction.CONCLUSIONS: Against the background of the extremely poor preoperative situation of our patients, the overall survival rate of 48% can be considered as favorable.A prospective, randomized study is planned to find out whether patients withidiopathic dilated or ischemic cardiomyopathy are more likely to benefit from abiventricular assist device or a total artificial heart.