: 1741675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2082. AACN Clin Issues Crit Care Nurs. 1991 Aug;2(3):587-97.The total artificial heart.Barker LE.In the early 1800s, an awareness of potential ventricular failure stimulatedinterest in artificial heart replacement. In 1937 the first total artificialheart (TAH) was implanted into the chest of a dog by Russian physicians. Theprimary driving force for mechanical cardiac assistance developed from thenecessity for circulatory assistance in order to perform corrective cardiacsurgery. In 1953 the first successful closure of an atrial septal defect usingextracorporeal circulation was performed. During the following decade the conceptof using mechanical devices to assist the failing heart was aggressively pursued.This culminated in the first implant of a TAH in a human in 1969 as a bridge totransplant. Clinical implant of the TAH as a permanent device was performed in1982 by researchers at the University of Utah. This patient lived for 112 days.Three successive permanent implants were performed in Louisville, Kentucky, with one patient surviving for 620 days. All of these permanent TAH patients suffered from device-related complications including bleeding, infection, andthromboembolic events. It became apparent that the present configuration of theTAH with its external drive lines and large air console was not ideal forlong-term support. In 1985 the first implant of the Symbion J-7-100 TAH(Jarvik-7) as a bridge to transplant was performed. This patient was supported bythe device for 9 days and was successfully transplanted and discharged home.Since 1985 more than 170 patients have been bridged using the Symbion J-7 TAHwith more than 70% of these patients being successfully transplanted. Theincidence of thromboembolic events has dramatically reduced with betterunderstanding of anticoagulation requirements. Infection continues to be thegreatest potential complication with these patients. In spite of this, thepneumatic TAH has proved to be an adequate bridge to transplant device.