: 21486630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]813. Transplant Proc. 2011 Apr;43(3):923-6. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2011.01.116.Ventricular assist system applications in end-stage heart failure.Yagdi T(1), Oguz E, Ayik F, Ertugay S, Nalbantgil S, Engin C, Ozbaran M.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Ege University Medical Faculty, Izmir,Turkey.BACKGROUND: Mechanical circulatory support has an important role in the surgical therapy for heart failure. Patients deteriorating on transplantation waitinglists or those unsuitable for transplantation have been treated with ventricular assist devices. In this report, we have presented application of ventricularassist systems for patients with end-stage heart failure.METHODS: Between April 2007 and September 2010, we treated 37 patients withend-stage heart failure with mechanical circulatory support, including 5 childrenyounger than 16 years of age. Three patients were females, and the overall meanage was 40 ± 18 years (range, 1.5-67). In 29 patients we implanted paracorporeal pneumatic ventricular assist devices. Axial flow pumps were chosen to support theleft ventricle in 8 patients. Biventricular support was applied in 9 patientsbecause of their poor preoperative clinical conditions and advanced evidence ofright ventricular failure.RESULTS: Heart transplantation was performed in 16 patients (43%). One subject,who was managed with a left ventricular assist device implantation and coronarybypass grafting, was weaned from the system because of recovery of ventricularfunctions. Eleven patients (30%) are still on pump support. Nine patients (24%)died during mechanical circulatory support. The most prevalent cause of mortalitywas multiorgan failure (n = 5; 13.5%). Cerebrovascular hemorrhage was the causeof death in 2 patients. One patient died due to acute lung injury, and an otherdue to malignant melanoma.CONCLUSION: Use of a ventricular assist device as a bridge-to-transplantation or as destination therapy can be performed with acceptable mortality. It may be the most promising option for patients with end-stage heart failure. Development ofdevice technology, advanced monitoring of anticoagulation and anti-aggregationtherapy, and greater clinical experience may yield better results.Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.