: 21332868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]847. Circ Res. 2011 Apr 1;108(7):857-61. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.241380. Epub 2011Feb 17.Functionally competent cardiac stem cells can be isolated from endomyocardialbiopsies of patients with advanced cardiomyopathies.D'Amario D(1), Fiorini C, Campbell PM, Goichberg P, Sanada F, Zheng H, Hosoda T, Rota M, Connell JM, Gallegos RP, Welt FG, Givertz MM, Mitchell RN, Leri A,Kajstura J, Pfeffer MA, Anversa P.Author information: (1)Departments of Anesthesia and Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. panversa@partners.orgRATIONALE: Two categories of cardiac stem cells (CSCs) with predominantlymyogenic (mCSC) and vasculogenic (vCSC) properties have been characterized in thehuman heart. However, it is unknown whether functionally competent CSCs of bothclasses are present in the myocardium of patients affected by end-stage cardiacfailure, and whether these cells can be harvested from relatively smallmyocardial samples.OBJECTIVE: To establish whether a clinically relevant number of mCSCs and vCSCscan be isolated and expanded from endomyocardial biopsies of patients undergoing cardiac transplantation or left ventricular assist device implantation.METHODS AND RESULTS: Endomyocardial biopsies were collected with a bioptome from the right side of the septum of explanted hearts or the apical LV core at thetime of left ventricular assist device implantation. Two to 5 biopsies from each patient were enzymatically dissociated, and, after expansion, cells were sortedfor c-kit (mCSCs) or c-kit and KDR (vCSCs) and characterized. mCSCs and vCSCsconstituted 97% and 3% of the c-kit population, respectively. Population doublingtime averaged 27 hours in mCSCs and vCSCs; 5×10(6) mCSCs and vCSCs were obtained in 28 and 41 days, respectively. Both CSC classes possessed significant growthreserve as documented by high telomerase activity and relatively long telomeres. mCSCs formed mostly cardiomyocytes, and vCSCs endothelial and smooth musclecells.CONCLUSIONS: The growth properties of mCSCs and vCSCs isolated fromendomyocardial biopsies from patients with advanced heart failure were comparableto those obtained previously from larger myocardial samples of patientsundergoing elective cardiac surgery.PMCID: PMC3074470