: 11081882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1780. Ann Thorac Surg. 2000 Oct;70(4):1255-8.Recurrent remodeling after ventricular assistance: is long-term myocardialrecovery attainable?Helman DN(1), Maybaum SW, Morales DL, Williams MR, Beniaminovitz A, Edwards NM,Mancini DM, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, New York Presbyterian Hospital, College of Physiciansand Surgeons of Columbia University, New York 10032, USA.BACKGROUND: Long-term left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) have been used both as a bridge to heart transplantation and to recovery of native myocardialfunction. Despite much evidence for reversal of some of the structural andfunctional changes present in the failing heart during LVAD support, clinicalevidence for sustained myocardial recovery is scant. We describe 2 patients inwhom myocardial recovery during LVAD support led to device explanation only tohave heart failure recur. This necessitated a second LVAD implantation, a processthat we have termed recurrent remodeling.METHODS: The medical records of 2 patients with cardiomyopathy supported withHeartMate LVADs (Thermo Cardiosystems, Inc, Woburn, MA) were retrospectivelyreviewed.RESULTS: One patient was supported with an LVAD for 2 months, at which time theLVAD was explanted. Progressive deterioration of cardiac function followed,requiring a second LVAD 19 months after LVAD explanation. After 2 months offurther LVAD support, a second episode of apparent myocardial recovery wasobserved during a period of device malfunction. The other patient was supportedwith an LVAD for 12 months, at which time the LVAD was explanted. The patientexperienced progressive hemodynamic deterioration and required a second LVAD 6months after LVAD explantation. Heart transplantations of both patients weresuccessful.CONCLUSIONS: Our understanding of myocardial recovery in the setting ofhemodynamic unloading with LVAD support has not yet progressed to the point wherewe are able to accurately predict successful long-term LVAD explantation. Theevolution of reliable predictors of sustainable myocardial recovery will help to avoid further cases of recurrent remodeling requiring repeat LVAD implantation.