: 11244768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1763. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2001 Feb;107(2):364-73.The use of muscle flaps to treat left ventricular assist device infections.Hutchinson OZ(1), Oz MC, Ascherman JA.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, NY10032, USA.Left ventricular assist devices have become an important adjunct in thetherapeutic armamentarium for patients with end-stage heart failure. Althoughthey may provide a bridge to transplantation, they are prone to certain problems,expecially infection. Because these are life-sustaining devices, changing thedevice or simple explantation may be a risky, if not impossible, option.Therefore, we evaluated the effectiveness of a surgical alternative, namely,coverage of infected devices with muscle or myocutaneous flaps. Eighty-twoconsecutive patients who underwent the insertion of 88 left ventricular assistdevices at our institution over a 6.5-year period were evaluated. Follow-up wasprovided for all patients and ranged from 1 to 7.5 years. The duration ofventricular support ranged from 0 to 434 days. All patients who demonstratedclinical evidence of infection were identified. Overall, 54 patients (66 percent)had infections locally at the device site, at distant sites, or systemicallyduring support. Cultured organisms included gram-positive and -negative bacteria,fungi, and viruses. Of the 56 infections in these 54 patients, 21 (38 percent)were device-related, i.e., in the pocket created by the device, in the deviceitself, or from the driveline. Thus, 24 percent (21 of 88) of all ventricularsupport devices inserted demonstrated device infection during use. Therapeuticmodalities used to combat device-related infection included both nonsurgicalmanagement with antibiotics alone and surgical procedures such as device changeor relocation, device explant, and flap coverage. Eight of the 20 patients inwhom the 21 device-related infections occurred underwent surgical intervention.Four of these eight patients undenwent local flap coverage of their infected leftventricular assist devices. All four patients also had evidence of systemicinfection, or "device endocarditis." Coverage was successfully achieved in allcases with pedicled rectus abdominis flaps. There were no perioperativecomplications. Two patients later underwent successful transplantation; the othertwo died from causes unrelated to the flap. In conclusion, the treatment ofinfected left ventricular assist devices currently includes both nonsurgical and surgical alternatives. Of the latter, muscle flaps should be considered afirst-line intervention to assist in eradicating infection by providingwell-vascularized tissue. Although there were no perioperative complications, the50 percent mortality rate is consistent with that reported for patients with"device endocarditis." It may be that flap coverage of infected ventricularassist devices, if instituted at an earlier stage in the therapeutic process,could help prevent systemic infection in these patients and, therefore, improvetheir overall outcome.