: 24368965  [PubMed]296. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2014 Feb;24(2):100-3. doi: 10.1089/lap.2013.0460.Epub 2013 Dec 24.Laparoscopic cholecystectomy in patients with HeartMate II left ventricularassist devices.Eck DL(1), Belli EV, Smith CD, Stauffer JA.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic , Jacksonville, Florida.INTRODUCTION: With an expanding population of patients requiring ventricularassist devices, it is inevitable that these patients will require noncardiacsurgery. Ventricular assist devices provide mechanical support for a failingheart either as a bridge to transplant or now as a long-term support iftransplant is not available, so-called destination therapy. These devices can addsignificant technical challenges to abdominal surgery, in that the power supplyand drivelines crossing the abdomen can potentially be damaged. The use ofpreoperative or intraoperative imaging may aid in locating these devices andincrease patient safety.MATERIALS AND METHODS: We describe a laparoscopic cholecystectomy in two patientssupported with HeartMate(®) II (Thoratec Corp., Pleasanton, CA) left ventricular assist devices. Our use of fluoroscopic guidance in port placement is alsodescribed. A literature review was performed to assess the frequency oflaparoscopic procedures performed on patients with similar ventricular assistdevices and of complications associated with the device and other comorbidities.RESULTS: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed without significantintraoperative hemodynamic changes. The use of imaging, such as fluoroscopy, can identify the location of the ventricular assist device and its associated drivewires to assure they are not damaged intraoperatively.CONCLUSIONS: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy can be performed safely on patientswith ventricular assist devices. Complications due to damage to the device can beavoided with the assistance of fluoroscopy to identify the implanted abdominalportions of the ventricular assist device. Each laparoscopic procedure performed on these patients presents the surgeon with unique obstacles in which carefuloperative planning and intraoperative monitoring are essential.