: 25773536  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]27. Asian J Surg. 2015 Mar 12. pii: S1015-9584(15)00004-4. doi:10.1016/j.asjsur.2015.01.003. [Epub ahead of print]Colo-colonic anastomosis in a continuous-flow left ventricular assist devicepatient.Knaus WJ(1), Olson CH(2).Author information: (1)University of Texas, Southwestern Dallas, TX, USA. (2)University of Texas,Southwestern Dallas, TX, USA. Electronic address: Craig.Olson@utsouthwestern.edu.Noncardiac operations are being increasingly performed on patients with leftventricular assist devices (LVADs). However, little is known on the impact ofcontinuous-flow LVADs on the vascular supply of the colon for anastomoses. Inthis case, a 67-year-old male supported on an LVAD underwent four successfulnoncardiac operations including two intestinal anastomoses; left colon and small bowel anastomosis. To the best of our knowledge, no existing literature hasreported successful colonic anastomosis on a continuous-flow LVAD. This caseillustrates the plausibility of performing colonic anastomoses with appropriatelyselected patients supported on an LVAD. A 67-year-old male with congestive heart failure underwent LVAD placement for decompensated heart failure while awaitingorthotopic transplantation. During his recovery, he developed a stage IV sacraldecubitus ulcer which required a sigmoid loop colostomy placement and arotational flap. Subsequent stoma closure with partial sigmoid colectomy andstapled anastomosis was performed, and healed without evidence of anastomoticleak. This case illustrates the potential for colonic anastomoses for patients oncontinuous-flow LVAD support. Although oxygenation is known to be an importantaspect of healing, this patient's outcome suggests that intestinal anastomosescan be performed on the induced pulseless environment of an LVAD. Further studieswill be needed to further elucidate the success of longer segment resections and appropriate surgical candidates.Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Taiwan.