: 21912911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]737. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2012 Sep-Oct;27(5):394-402. doi: 10.1097/JCN.0b013e318227f119.Life in transition: a qualitative study of the illness experience and vocational adjustment of patients with left ventricular assist device.Overgaard D(1), Grufstedt Kjeldgaard H, Egerod I.Author information: (1)Heart Centre, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Denmark.dorthe.overgaard@rh.regionh.dkBACKGROUND: A left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is used as a bridge totransplantation in patients with acute heart failure. The device is a majorbodily invasion that challenges everyday life. Only few studies have explored thepsychosocial adjustments of patients living with an LVAD.OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore the lived experience of patients with LVADs.METHODS: The present study had a qualitative explorative design using in-depthinterviews of 10 adult patients that had experienced life with an LVAD from 2008 to 2010 in Denmark. We constructed an interview guide with themes relating to thechronology of the illness trajectory. Data were managed by the qualitativecomputer package NVivo 8. As a theoretical framework, we chose a life-stage modelfor the main theme: Life With LVAD. The model describes the developmental tasksin each age group, and we looked at the physical, psychological, social, andvocational adjustments of patients with LVADs.RESULTS: Despite the suddenness of onset and gravity of illness, the patients in our study coped well with their situation. While bridging to transplantation, thepatients experienced the ambivalence of gratitude and frustration toward theLVAD, and during preparation for cardiac transplantation, they experienced theambivalence of hope and fear. Some resolved their emotional ambiguity byprocrastination in relation to vocational adjustments that were necessary due to their illness. Older patients with occupational security were quicker to resumework and everyday life.CONCLUSIONS: Patients with LVADs succeeded somewhat in reestablishing theirlives, but the younger individuals still need to consider vocational options.Some patients need help to get out of the sick role that kept them on disability benefits. The patients all relied on support from close family: parents, spouses,and children.