: 17234515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1327. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2007 Jan;26(1):16-23.Determination of optimal duration of mechanical unloading for failing hearts toachieve bridge to recovery in a rat heterotopic heart transplantation model.Oriyanhan W(1), Tsuneyoshi H, Nishina T, Matsuoka S, Ikeda T, Komeda M.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, KyotoUniversity, Kyoto, Japan.BACKGROUND: Mechanical unloading (MU) of a failing heart using a left ventricularassist device (LVAD) can lead to "bridge to recovery" in some patients. However, it is still unknown how to determine when to withdraw assistance. We sought todetermine the optimal duration of MU by investigating its short- and long-termeffects using a rat model of heterotopic heart transplantation.METHODS: Heart failure (HF) was induced in Lewis rats by ligating the leftanterior descending artery. In the MU-HF groups, failing hearts were harvestedand heterotopically transplanted. In the non-unloaded HF groups and the controlgroup, hearts were not transplanted. After 2, 4 and 8 weeks, we evaluatedpapillary muscle function, histologic change and cardiac gene expression. Normal hearts served as the control group.RESULTS: In the MU-HF groups, papillary muscle function improved significantly inthe early period of unloading. It peaked and normalized at 4 weeks of unloading, but decreased to 50% the level of a normal heart at 8 weeks. In parallel withpapillary muscle function, expression of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) mRNA andSERCA2a mRNA normalized at 2 and 4 weeks of unloading, respectively, butdeteriorated after 4 weeks. Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy was normalized at 2 weeksof unloading, but extended unloading induced cardiac atrophy. Myocardial fibrosisincreased after unloading.CONCLUSIONS: Mechanical unloading of the failing heart can help normalize cardiacfunction, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and cardiac gene expression for an optimalduration (<4 weeks), but this normalization deteriorates with prolonged support.