: 15497394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1514. ASAIO J. 2004 Sep-Oct;50(5):403-9.Physiologic control of rotary blood pumps: an in vitro study.Giridharan GA(1), Pantalos GM, Gillars KJ, Koenig SC, Skliar M.Author information: (1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah84112, USA.Rotary blood pumps (RBPs) are currently being used as a bridge to transplantationas well as for myocardial recovery and destination therapy for patients withheart failure. Physiologic control systems for RBPs that can automatically andautonomously adjust the pump flow to match the physiologic requirement of thepatient are needed to reduce human intervention and error, while improving thequality of life. Physiologic control systems for RBPs should ensure adequateperfusion while avoiding inflow occlusion via left ventricular (LV) suction forvarying clinical and physical activity conditions. For RBPs used as leftventricular assist devices (LVADs), we hypothesize that maintaining a constantaverage pressure difference between the pulmonary vein and the aorta (deltaPa)would give rise to a physiologically adequate perfusion while avoiding LVsuction. Using a mock circulatory system, we tested the performance of thecontrol strategy of maintaining a constant average deltaPa and compared it withthe results obtained when a constant average pump pressure head (deltaP) andconstant rpm are maintained. The comparison was made for normal, failing, andasystolic left heart during rest and at light exercise. The deltaPa wasmaintained at 95 +/- 1 mm Hg for all the scenarios. The results indicate that thedeltaPa control strategy maintained or restored the total flow rate to that ofthe physiologically normal heart during rest (3.8 L/m) and light exercise (5.4L/m) conditions. The deltaPa approach adapted to changing exercise and clinicalconditions better than the constant rpm and constant deltaP control strategies.The deltaPa control strategy requires the implantation of two pressure sensors,which may not be clinically feasible. Sensorless RBP control using the deltaPaalgorithm, which can eliminate the failure prone pressure sensors, is beingcurrently investigated.