: 14524557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1593. Anesth Analg. 2003 Oct;97(4):964-71, table of contents.Anesthetic management for implantation of the Jarvik 2000 left ventricular assistsystem.Nussmeier NA(1), Probert CB, Hirsch D, Cooper JR Jr, Gregoric ID, Myers TJ,Frazier OH.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Anesthesiology, Texas Heart Institute at St.Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.nnussmeier@heart.thi.tmc.eduThe Jarvik 2000 Heart(TM) is a left ventricular assist device that producescontinuous nonpulsatile axial flow by means of a single, rotating, vanedimpeller. Anesthetic and perioperative considerations of the Jarvik 2000Heart(TM) differ from those of conventional assist devices. The Jarvik 2000 isimplanted within the left ventricle through a left thoracotomy, which is aided byleft lung isolation. A brief period of cardiopulmonary bypass and inducedventricular fibrillation facilitate implantation. Transesophagealechocardiography is essential to assure proper intraventricular positioning ofthe device and aortic outflow, confirmed by observation of aortic valve openingin the presence of adequate left ventricular volume. Because continuous flowdevices function best in the presence of lower systemic and pulmonary vascularresistance, milrinone was preferentially used as an inotropic drug. In the first group of 10 patients to receive the Jarvik 2000, the pump provided a cardiacoutput of up to 8 L/min, depending on preload, afterload, and pump speed. Therewere no early perioperative deaths. The average support duration was 81.2 days;the range was 13-214 days. Seven of the 10 patients survived to transplantation. Survivors underwent complete physical rehabilitation during pumpsupport.IMPLICATIONS: The Jarvik 2000 is a left ventricular assist device thatproduces continuous nonpulsatile axial flow by means of a rotating, vanedimpeller. Because the anesthetic considerations differ from those of conventionalleft ventricular assist devices, we report the perioperative management of thefirst 10 patients who participated in a bridge-to-transplantation feasibilitystudy of the Jarvik 2000.