: 24464393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]262. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Mar;33(3):223-8. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.11.011.Epub 2013 Dec 4.Scientific progress in heart and lung failure, mechanical circulatory support,and transplantation: highlights from the Journal of Heart and LungTransplantation.Shah KB(1), Kwakkel-van Erp JM(2), Migliore C(3), Orr Y(4), Corris PA(5),Glanville AR(6), Slaughter MS(7), West LJ(8), Mehra MR(9).Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia. Electronic address: kshah@mcvh-vcu.edu. (2)Division of Heart and Lungs,Department of Respiratory Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,The Netherlands. (3)Barnabas Health Center, Newark Beth Israel Medical Center,Newark, New Jersey. (4)Division of Congenital Heart Surgery, Texas Children'sHospital and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (5)Institute ofTransplantation, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.(6)The Lung Transplant Unit, St. Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales,Australia. (7)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University ofLouisville, Louisville, Kentucky. (8)Department of Pediatrics, University ofAlberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. (9)Division of Cardiology, Brigham andWomen's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.At the Thirty-third Annual Meeting and Scientific Sessions of the InternationalSociety of Heart and Lung Transplantation (Montréal, Quebec, Canada), a jointsession between the Junior Faculty Council members and the editorial consultants of the Journal of Heart and Lung Transplantation took place to summarize recentlypublished impacting publications in the Journal. The topics reviewed weremechanical circulatory support, heart transplantation, lung transplantation,pulmonary hypertension and pediatrics. The cooperative presentations has beenformulated into the present report.© 2014 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Published byInternational Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation All rights reserved.