: 24392937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]288. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2014 Apr;33(4):422-8. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2013.10.032.Epub 2013 Oct 25.Extended in vivo evaluation of a miniaturized axial flow pump with a novel inflowcannula for a minimal invasive implantation procedure.Schima H(1), Zrunek P(2), Stoiber M(3), Larose J(4), Shambaugh C(4), Tamez D(4), Deckert Z(5), Plasenzotti R(6), Bergmeister H(7), Wieselthaler G(8).Author information: (1)Center for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering; Department ofCardiothoracic Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria;Ludwig-Boltzmann-Cluster for Cardiovascular Research, Vienna, Austria. Electronicaddress: heinrich.schima@meduniwien.ac.at. (2)Department of CardiothoracicSurgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Heartware Inc, MiamiLakes, Florida. (3)Center for Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering;Ludwig-Boltzmann-Cluster for Cardiovascular Research, Vienna, Austria.(4)Heartware Inc, Miami Lakes, Florida. (5)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (6)Division of BiomedicalResearch, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (7)Division ofBiomedical Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria;Ludwig-Boltzmann-Cluster for Cardiovascular Research, Vienna, Austria.(8)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,Austria; Ludwig-Boltzmann-Cluster for Cardiovascular Research, Vienna, Austria.BACKGROUND: Minimally invasive techniques are desirable to minimize surgicaltrauma during left ventricular assist device (LVAD) implantation. This isparticularly challenging for full-flow support. In this study, a minimallyinvasive implantation technique was developed for a microaxial rotary pump. Thesystem was evaluated in a chronic sheep model.METHODS: A HeartWare MVAD (HeartWare, Miami Lakes, FL) pump (length, 50 mm;diameter, 21 mm; maximum flow, 7-8 liters/min) was combined with a novel inflowcannula, including a new flow-optimized tip. The device was implanted into sheep (range, 60-80 kg, mean, 71.6 ± 6.8 kg) through a right-sided minithoracotomy. Theinflow cannula was inserted through the superior pulmonary vein, passing through the left atrium into the left ventricle. Scheduled implant period was 30 days for8 sheep and 100 days for 3 sheep. Mean support flow was set to half of thenominal cardiac output.RESULTS: Six of 8 sheep finished the scheduled 30-day investigation period (onefailed due to early non-pump-related post-operative bleeding and one due toprototype controller failure). The 3 sheep scheduled for 100 days reached thestudy end point. Peak pump flows of up to 6.9 liters/min were achieved. Atnecropsy, no signs of mitral valve lesions or thrombus formation around thecannula, the tip, or the insertion site were observed, except for valve leafleterosion in 1 animal, where the cannula had been entangled in the sub-valvularchords due to lack of ultrasound monitoring.CONCLUSIONS: The minimally invasive implantation technique using the HeartWareMVAD pump, together with a new cannula, provided excellent results in a chronicanimal model.© 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Published byInternational Society for the Heart and Lung Transplantation All rights reserved.