: 18303518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1230. Cell Transplant. 2007;16(9):941-9.Intramyocardial delivery of bone marrow mononuclear cells and mechanical assistdevice implantation in patients with end-stage cardiomyopathy.Nasseri BA(1), Kukucka M, Dandel M, Knosalla C, Potapov E, Lehmkuhl HB, Meyer R, Ebell W, Stamm C, Hetzer R.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin, Berlin, Germany.In end-stage heart failure, mechanical ventricular assist devices (VAD) are beingused as bridge-to-transplantation, as a bridge-to-recovery, or as the definitive therapy. We tested the hypothesis that myocardial implantation of autologous bonemarrow mononuclear cells (BMNC) increases the likelihood of successful weaningfrom left VAD (LVAD) support. Ten patients (aged 14-60 years) with deteriorating heart function underwent LVAD implantation and concomitant implantation ofautologous BMNC. Bone marrow was harvested prior to VAD implantation and BMNCwere prepared by density centrifugation. Two patients received a pulsatile,extracorporeal LVAD and eight a nonpulsatile implantable device. Between 52 and164 x 10(7) BMNC containing between 1 and 12 x 10(6) CD34+ cells were injectedinto the LV myocardium. There was one early and one late death. The median timeon LVAD support was 243 days (range 24-498 days). Repeated echocardiographicexaminations under increased hemodynamic load revealed a significant improvement of LV function in one patient. Three patients underwent heart transplantation,and four patients remain on LVAD support >1 year without evidence of recovery.Only one patient was successfully weaned from LVAD support after 4 months, and LVfunction has remained stable ever since. In patients with endstagecardiomyopathy, intramyocardial injection of BMNC at the time of LVADimplantation does not seem to increase the likelihood of successful weaning from VAD support. Other cell-based strategies should be pursued to harness thepotential of cell therapy in LVAD patients.