: 16790383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1383. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Sep;41(3):441-50. Epub 2006 Jun 12.Selective upregulation of beta1-adrenergic receptors and dephosphorylation oftroponin I in end-stage heart failure patients supported by ventricular assistdevices.Milting H(1), Scholz C, Arusoglu L, Freitag M, Cebulla R, Jaquet K, Körfer R, VLewinski D, Kassner A, Brodde OE, Kögler H, El Banayosy A, Pieske B.Author information: (1)Ruhr-Universität Bochum; Herz- and Diabeteszentrum NRW, Erich and HannaKlessmann-Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Forschung and Entwicklung; 32545 BadOeynhausen, Germany. hmilting@hdz-nrw.deComment in    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Sep;41(3):413-5.In terminal failing hearts, adrenergic receptors are downregulated andintracellular adrenergic signal transduction is inhibited. Mechanical circulatorysupport by ventricular assist devices (VAD) is used to bridge patients to hearttransplantation. Mechanical unloading by VAD may induce reverse remodeling inheart transplantation (HTx) candidates. However, little is known onbeta-adrenergic receptor subtype regulation and adrenergic signal transductionunder VAD-support. We investigated paired myocardial samples from 16VAD-supported patients and 9 non-failing donor hearts. We analyzedbeta-adrenergic receptor subtype regulation by real-time PCR and radioligandbinding and cardiac troponin I phosphorylation (by phospho-cTnI-specificantibodies). We found that the beta1-adrenergic receptor (beta1AR) isdownregulated at VAD-implantation on mRNA and protein levels whereas thebeta2-adrenergic receptor (beta2AR) was not. After VAD-support, beta1AR proteinbut not its mRNA was upregulated, whereas the degree of cTnI-phosphorylation was reduced. Upregulation of beta1AR was enhanced by beta blocking medication during VAD-support. However, in 9 out of 15 patients, beta1AR-density remained below the0.25 percentile of donor hearts. VAD-support is associated with partialnormalization of the betaAR-signal transduction pathways. This beneficial effect is related to a posttranscriptional increase in beta1AR-density.