: 9109801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1935. Circulation. 1997 Apr 1;95(7):1844-52.Bridge experience with long-term implantable left ventricular assist devices. Arethey an alternative to transplantation?Oz MC(1), Argenziano M, Catanese KA, Gardocki MT, Goldstein DJ, Ashton RC,Gelijns AC, Rose EA, Levin HR.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, NY,USA. mco2@columbia.eduBACKGROUND: If long-term use of left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) asbridges to transplantation is successful, the issue of permanent deviceimplantation in lieu of transplantation could be addressed through the creationof appropriately designed trials. Our medium-term experience with bothpneumatically and electrically powered ThermoCardiosystems LVADs is presented to outline the benefits and limitations of device support in lieu oftransplantation.METHODS AND RESULTS: Detailed records were kept prospectively for all patientsundergoing LVAD insertion. Fifty-eight LVADs were inserted over 5 years, with asurvival rate of 74%. Mean patient age was 50 years, and duration of supportaveraged 98 days. Although common, both preexisting infection and infectionduring LVAD support were not associated with increased mortality or decreasedrate of successful transplantation. Thromboembolic complications were rare,occurring in only three patients (5%) despite the absence of anticoagulation.Ventricular arrhythmias were well tolerated in all patients except in cases ofearly perioperative right ventricular failure, with no deaths. Right ventricular failure occurred in one third of patients and was managed in a small percentageby right ventricular assist device (RVAD) support and/or inhaled nitric oxidetherapy. There were no serious device malfunctions, but five graft-relatedhemorrhages resulted in two deaths. Finally, a variety of noncardiac surgicalprocedures were performed in LVAD recipients, with no major morbidity andmortality.CONCLUSIONS: Over all, our medium-term experience with implantable LVAD supportis encouraging. Although additional areas of investigation exist, improvements inpatients selection and management together with device alterations that havereduced the thromboembolic incidence and facilitated patient rehabilitation lead us to believe that a prospective, randomized trial is indicated to study the rolethat LVADs may have as an alternative to medical management.