: 9883757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1872. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998 Nov;66(5):1498-506.Circulatory support with pneumatic paracorporeal ventricular assist device ininfants and children.Hetzer R(1), Loebe M, Potapov EV, Weng Y, Stiller B, Hennig E, Alexi-Meskishvili V, Lange PE.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Deutsches HerzzentrumBerlin, Germany. hetzer@dhzb.deComment in    Ann Thorac Surg. 2000 Mar;69(3):976.BACKGROUND: Mechanical circulatory support in intractable heart failure inchildren has been limited to centrifugal pumps and extracorporeal membraneoxygenation: Since 1990 small adult-size pulsatile air-driven ventricular assist devices "Berlin Heart" (VAD) and, since 1992 miniaturized pediatric VAD (12, 15, 25, 30 mL pumps), have been used in our institution. Since 1994 theblood-contacting surfaces of the device system have been heparin-coated. In this report the experiences with VAD support in 28 children are presented.METHODS: In 28 children-ages between 6 days and 16 years-the Berlin Heart VAD hasbeen applied for periods of between 12 hours and 98 days (mean, 16.9 days) aimingat keeping the patient alive and allowing for recovery from shock sequelae until later transplantation or myocardial recovery. There were three groups. Group I:with primary intention of "bridge-to-transplantation" in various forms ofcardiomyopathy (n = 13) or chronic stages of congenital heart disease (n = 5).Group II: "Rescue" in intractable heart failure early after corrective surgeryfor congenital heart disease (n = 4) or in early graft failure after a hearttransplantation (n = 1). Group III: "Acute myocarditis" (n = 5) aiming at either myocardial recovery or transplantation. Twelve were brought to the operating roomunder cardiac massage and 25 had been on the respirator for more than 24 hours.RESULTS: Twelve patients died on the system from sequelae of profoundshock-multiorgan failure, sepsis, loss of peripheral circulatory resistance-orfrom hemorrhagic complications (n = 4) or brain death (n = 1). Thirteen patients (groups I and III) were transplanted after support periods of between 3 and 98days with 7 long-term survivors living now up to 7.5 years (mean, 4.4 years).Three patients (groups II and III) were weaned from the system with two long-termsurvivors (both in group III). There were no patients in group II who survivedand the "rescue" indication has been discarded for VAD since 1992. Such patients are since treated by extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in ourinstitution. Out of the 8 patients placed on VAD during 1996 and 1997, 7 weresuccessfully supported until transplantation or weaning. Thirteen patients wereextubated and mobilized on the system. Whereas with the earlier systems thrombiin the blood pumps were seen in 15 instances and 2 patients suffered fromthromboembolic complications, no thrombotic events occurred with theheparin-coated systems.CONCLUSIONS: After accumulating clinical experience and several technicalimprovements since 1990 the use of the pediatric Berlin Heart VAD has maturedinto a reliable and safe system to keep patients with otherwise intractable heartfailure alive until complete myocardial recovery is reached or transplantationbecomes feasible. Whereas heart failure early after cardiac operation is nowprimarily treated by ECMO, acute myocarditis appears to be a promisingprecondition for complete cardiac recovery during VAD support.