: 25512901  [PubMed]63. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2014 Nov;3(6):573-81. doi:10.3978/j.issn.2225-319X.2014.08.24.Comparison of continuous-flow and pulsatile-flow left ventricular assist devices:is there an advantage to pulsatility?Cheng A(1), Williamitis CA(1), Slaughter MS(1).Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, University of Louisville,Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.BACKGROUND: Continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices (CFVAD) are currentlythe most widely used type of mechanical circulatory support asbridge-to-transplant and destination therapy for end-stage congestive heartfailure (HF). Compared to the first generation pulsatile-flow left ventricularassist devices (PFVADs), CFVADs have demonstrated improved reliability anddurability. However, CFVADs have also been associated with certain complications thought to be linked with decreased arterial pulsatility. Previous studiescomparing CFVADs and PFVADs have presented conflicting results. It is importantto understand the outcome differences between CFVAD and PFVAD in order to furtheradvance the current VAD technology.METHODS: In this review, we compared the outcomes of CFVADs and PFVADs andexamined the need for arterial pulsatility for the future generation ofmechanical circulatory support.RESULTS: CVADs offer advantages of smaller size, increased reliability anddurability, and subsequent improvements in survival. However, with the increasingduration of long-term support, it appears that CFVADs may have specificcomplications and a lower rate of left ventricular recovery associated withdiminished pulsatility, increased pressure gradients on the aortic valve anddecreased compliance in smaller arterial vessels. PFVAD support or pulsatilitycontrol algorithms in CFVADs could be beneficial and potentially necessary forlong term support.CONCLUSIONS: Given the relative advantages and disadvantages of CFVADs andPFVADs, the ultimate solution may lie in incorporating pulsatility into currentand emerging CFVADs whilst retaining their existing benefits. Future studiesexamining physiologic responses, end-organ function and LV remodeling at varying degrees of pulsatility and device support levels are needed.PMCID: PMC4250555