: 10789713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1819. J Formos Med Assoc. 2000 Feb;99(2):79-85.Current status of artificial hearts and ventricular assist devices.Chu SH(1), Hsu RB.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei.Currently available approaches for patients with refractory heart failure includeintravenous inotropic therapy, partial left ventriculectomy, dynamiccardiomyoplasty, mechanical circulatory support, and heart transplantation. Hearttransplantation is limited by the availability of donor organs, which is neverexpected to meet the increasing demand. Numerous devices have been developed for circulatory support. Currently available devices differ in configuration,anatomic location, flow characteristics, and durability. Many devices arecurrently available for mechanical support, and they can generally be categorizedas follows: 1) pulsatile or continuous blood flow; 2) internal (implantable) orexternal (extracorporeal); 3) pneumatically or electrically powered; and 4) forshort-term or long-term support. Proper selection of patients for a given therapyhas a major impact on clinical outcome. Early implantation of implantabledevices, before the onset of multiple or irreversible end-organ failure, isessential. Short-term devices are indicated if myocardial recovery isanticipated, as in cases of postcardiotomy shock and acute myocarditis. Long-termdevices are indicated for transitioning patients with end-stage myocardialfailure to heart transplantation. Long-term assist devices may, in some selected cases, serve as an alternative to heart transplantation. This alternative willbenefit both patients in chronic heart failure competing for a limited donorsupply and patients with contraindications to transplantation, such as advancedage, previous malignancies, and renal dysfunction. The next generation of bloodpumps to be applied clinically is likely to be axial pumps, which are valveless, miniaturized, intraventricular left ventricular assist devices.