: 15123534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1536. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2004 May;127(5):1432-5.Psychosocial and sexual concerns of patients with implantable left ventricularassist devices: a pilot study.Samuels LE(1), Holmes EC, Petrucci R.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Lankenau Hospital, Wynnewood, PA 19096, USA. SamuelsLE@aol.comOBJECTIVE: We sought to determine the psychosocial and sexual concerns ofpatients discharged from the hospital with implantable left ventricular assistdevices.METHODS: Bridge-to-transplant patients with the Heartmate left ventricular assistdevice received a psychosocial and sexual survey at 1 month after discharge from the hospital. The survey consisted of 3 parts, with 5 questions in each category.The patients were asked to complete the survey by circling the responses and toprovide more detailed answers when necessary.RESULTS: There were 8 male patients who completed the questionnaire.Psychologically, all patients expressed a positive mood and found support fromfamily or religious sources. The majority described a change in attitude andbehavior. Socially, all patients described a change in lifestyle, as well as achange in the reaction of family and friends. No patient went back to work or hadthe desire to return to work until after transplantation. The minority ofpatients admitted to smoking or drinking. Sexually, the majority had the desireor participated in sexual activities. The majority of patients either used orwere interested in using sexual stimulants. There were no mechanical problemswith the left ventricular assist devices.CONCLUSIONS: Psychosocial and sexual conditions are altered in patients withheart failure who are discharged with implantable left ventricular assistdevices. At 1 month's time interval, there is an improvement in mood, anadjustment in lifestyle, and a positive shift in relations with family andfriends. There is sexual desire, with interest in sexual-enhancing medication.The most common concern is related to the pump, such as the durability of thedevice or damage to the components.