: 12164792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1674. J Med Dent Sci. 2000 Sep;47(3):151-65.Cardiac prosthesis as an advanced surgical therapy for end-stage cardiacpatients: current status and future perspectives.Takatani S(1).Author information: (1)Department of Artificial Organs, Institute of Biomaterials and Bioengineering Tokyo Medical and Dental University.This paper reviews the current status and future perspectives of the artificialheart research that was started in 1957 by Akutsu and Kolff. During the 1960's,although not much progress was made in increasing animal survival time withartificial hearts, clinical applications were already made for both a ventricularassist device in 1962 and total artificial heart (TAH) in 1969 followed by asecond TAH application in 1981. Both TAH applications were done as bridges toheart transplantation. Meanwhile, the animal survival time improved during the1970's because of the availability of better biomaterials, better understandingof the circulatory system, and improvement in surgical techniques. Continuousflow pumps were also investigated during the 1970's, which demonstratedfeasibility for chronically supporting circulation in healthy animals. Fourpermanent cases of TAH application were done early 1980's for patients who could not be the candidates for heart transplantation. Although the patients weretethered to the external drive-console, one of them survived for nearly twoyears. Complications due to thromboembolism and infection were the major causesof death in these patients. The patients' quality of life was questionable andthe permanent application of the TAH was then stopped to make improvements in thesystem in terms of implantability and biocompatibility. During the 1980's,efforts were then switcthed to development of totally implantable VAD and TAHsystems, which led to the first discharge of a VAD patient from the hospital in1992. In the early 1990's, implantable electric VADs, Novacor and ThermoCardioSystem (TCI), became available to support the circulation of end-stage cardiacpatients until a donor heart could be found. The transplantation rate of the VAD patients ranged around 70% with the average waiting time of 80 to 100 days. Thenumber of patients transplanted with VADs are more than 5000 and those with thepneumatic TAH exceed 200. Because of the larger size, requirement of heartvalves, and complicated control mechanism of the pulsatile VADs, continuous flow pumps have been gaining popularity among clinicians. The clinical applications ofthe continuous flow devices have just begun, demonstrating remarkable performancein bridging to heart transplantation. In, the 21st century, we will see prevalentclinical applications of various circulatory support devices from pulsatile VAD, pulsatile TAH to continuous flow VAD. These devices will be combined with genetictreatment to re-generate the myocardium and recover the failing heart. Completerecovery of the myocardium may become possible through therapy combiningcirculatory assist devices and biotechnology.