: 24281135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]316. Health Technol Assess. 2013 Nov;17(53):1-499, v-vi. doi: 10.3310/hta17530.Clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generationleft ventricular assist devices as either bridge to transplant or alternative to transplant for adults eligible for heart transplantation: systematic review andcost-effectiveness model.Sutcliffe P(1), Connock M, Pulikottil-Jacob R, Kandala NB, Suri G, Gurung T,Grove A, Shyangdan D, Briscoe S, Maheswaran H, Clarke A.Author information: (1)Warwick Evidence, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.BACKGROUND: Advanced heart failure (HF) is a debilitating condition for whichheart transplant (HT) offers the best treatment option. However, the supply ofdonor hearts is diminishing and demand greatly exceeds supply. Ventricular assistdevices (VADs) are surgically implanted pumps used as an alternative totransplant (ATT) or as a bridge to transplant (BTT) while a patient awaits adonor heart. Surgery and VADs are costly. For the NHS to allocate and deliversuch services in a cost-effective way the relative costs and benefits of thesealternative treatments need to be estimated.OBJECTIVES: To investigate for patients aged ≥ 16 years with advanced HF eligiblefor HT: (1) the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of second- andthird-generation VADs used as BTT compared with medical management (MM); and (2) the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generationVADs used as an ATT in comparison with their use as BTT therapy.DATA SOURCES: Searches for clinical effectiveness studies covered years from 2003to March 2012 and included the following data bases: MEDLINE, MEDLINE In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations, EMBASE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews(CDSR), Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE), NHS EconomicEvaluation Database (NHS EED), HTA databases [NHS Centre for Reviews andDissemination (CRD)], Science Citation Index and Conference Proceedings (Web ofScience), UK Clinical Research Network (UKCRN) Portfolio Database, CumulativeIndex to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), PsycINFO and NationalLibrary of Medicine (NLM) Gateway, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials(CENTRAL), Current Controlled Trials and ClinicalTrials.gov. Reference lists ofrelevant articles were checked, and VAD manufacturers' websites interrogated. Foreconomic analyses we made use of individual patient data (IPD) held in the UKBlood and Transplant Database (BTDB).REVIEW METHODS: Systematic reviews of evidence on clinical effectiveness andcost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation US Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) and/or Conformité Européenne (CE) approved VADs.Publications from the last 5 years with control groups, or case series with 50 ormore patients were included. Outcomes included survival, functional capacity(e.g. change in New York Heart Association functional classification), quality oflife (QoL) and adverse events. Data from the BTDB were obtained. A discrete-time,semi-Markov, multistate model was built. Deterministic and probabilistic methods with multiple sensitivity analyses varying survival, utilities and cost inputs tothe model were used. Model outputs were incremental cost-effectiveness ratios(ICERs), cost/quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) gained and cost/life-yeargained (LYG). The discount rate was 3.5% and the time horizon varied over 3years, 10 years and lifetime.RESULTS: Forty publications reported clinical effectiveness of VADs and one studyreported cost-effectiveness. We found no high-quality comparative empiricalstudies of VADs as BTT compared with MM or as ATT compared with BTT.Approximately 15-25% of the patients receiving a device had died by 12 months.Studies reported the following wide ranges for adverse events: 4-27% bleedingrequiring transfusion; 1.5-40% stroke; 3.3-48% infection; 1-14% device failure;3-30% HF; 11-32% reoperation; and 3-53% renal failure. QoL and functional status were reported as improved in studies of two devices [HeartMate II (HMII; ThoratecInc., Pleasanton, CA, USA) and HeartWare (HW; HeartWare Inc., Framingham, MA,USA)]. At 3 years, 10 years and lifetime, the ICERs for VADs as BTT compared withMM were £122,730, £68,088 and £55,173 respectively. These values were stable tochanges in survival of the MM group. Both QoL and costs were reduced by VADs asATT compared with VADs as BTT giving ICERs in south-west quadrant of the costeffectiveness plain (cost saving/QALY sacrificed) of £353,467, £31,685 and£20,637 over the 3 years, 10 years and lifetime horizons respectively.Probabilistic analyses yielded similar results for both research questions.LIMITATIONS: Conclusions about the clinical effectiveness were limited by thelack of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) comparing the effectiveness ofdifferent VADs for BTT or comparing BTT with any alternative treatment and by theoverlapping populations in published studies. Although IPD from the BTDB was usedto estimate the cost-effectiveness of VADs compared with MM for BTT, the lack of randomisation of populations limited the interpretation of this analysis.CONCLUSIONS: At 3 years, 10 years and lifetime the ICERs for VADs as BTT comparedwith MM are higher than generally applied willingness-to-pay thresholds in theUK, but at a lifetime time horizon they approximate threshold values used in end of life assessments. VADs as ATT have a reduced cost but cause reduced QALYsrelative to BTT. Future research should direct attention towards two areas.First, how any future evaluations of second- or third-generation VADs might beconducted. For ethical reasons a RCT offering equal probability of HT for eachgroup would not be feasible; future studies should fully assess costs, long-term patient survival, QoL, functional ability and adverse events, so that these maybe incorporated into economic evaluation agreement on outcomes measures acrossfuture studies. Second, continuation of accurate data collection in the UKdatabase to encompass QoL data and comparative assessment of performance withother international centres.FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.