: 17021440  [PubMed]1353. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2006 Sep 15;118(4):919-26; discussion 927.Omental transposition flap for salvage of ventricular assist devices.Sajjadian A(1), Valerio IL, Acurturk O, Askari MA, Sacks J, Kormos RL, MandersEK.Author information: (1)Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of PittsburghMedical Center, Pa. 15261, USA. sajjadiana@upmc.eduBACKGROUND: The use of ventricular assist devices for patients with end-stagecardiac failure awaiting heart transplantation has become increasingly common.Ventricular assist devices improve the longevity and the quality of life forthese patients. In addition, they serve as a bridge to cardiac allografttransplantation until a donor heart is found. However, ventricular assistdevice-related infections remain a major problem complicating their long-termuse. Clinical infection and sepsis can critically threaten these patients withventricular assist devices. Infection can delay immediate transplantation andpotentially require the removal of the device for definitive treatment of theproblem.METHODS: Patients who underwent insertion of a ventricular assist device at theUniversity of Pittsburgh Medical Center were identified through accessing themedical records archives of the hospital. Review of patients' medical records wasconducted to obtain patient demographics, preoperative diagnosis and diseasestate, type of ventricular assist device inserted, postoperative day ofventricular assist device infection onset, infectious organism identified, timingof omental flap procedure after the initial insertion, duration of ventricularassist device support before cardiac transplantation, and patient follow-up.RESULTS: There were 76 patients who underwent a ventricular assist deviceinsertion procedure during the 4-year period between January of 2000 and January of 2004. Of the 76 patients who received a device, 11 (14 percent) had evidenceof clinical infection secondary to insertion. Two of these 11 patients diedbefore surgical intervention, four had their devices explanted, and the remainingfive underwent omental flap transposition with bilateral pectoralis majoradvancement flaps in surgically addressing their infections. Of the five patientswith infections who received omental transposition flaps, two went on to undergo successful transplantation, two continue to await cardiac allografttransplantation, and one died as a result of an unknown cause.CONCLUSIONS: The authors present their experience with five patients who receivedomental transposition flaps to cover infected ventricular assist device pumps andthe associated tubing in large, open sternoabdominal wounds. Treatment includedthe direct application of an omental transposition flap over the infected device with use of a bilateral pectoralis advancement flap to aid in complete sternaland skin closure of the sternal wound defect. In each of these cases, the use of the omental flap was followed by resolution of the mediastinal infection. Inaddition, the treatment with an omental flap prevented the removal of infecteddevices in patients who were otherwise pump dependent during their waitingperiods for transplantation. The use of omental transposition flaps can be aneffective technique in salvaging infected ventricular assist devices andpreserving this valuable device for patients awaiting a cardiac transplant.