: 22851758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]592. Artif Organs. 2012 Oct;36(10):859-67. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.2012.01485.x. Epub2012 Jul 30.Increasing the transmitted flow pulse in a rotary left ventricular assist device.Gaddum NR(1), Fraser JF, Timms DL.Author information: (1)Critical Care Research Group, The Prince Charles Hospital, Brisbane,Queensland, Australia. nickgaddum@gmail.comLong-term rotary left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are increasinglyemployed to bridge patients with end-stage heart failure to transplant or as adestination therapy. Significant recent device development has increased patient support times, shifting further development focus toward physiologicallysensitive control of the pump operation. Sensorless control of these deviceswould benefit from increased observability of the ventricular volume/preload tothe pump, in order to regulate flow based on preload, imitating the nativeFrank-Starling flow control. Monitoring the transmitted flow pulse through thepump has been used as a surrogate for preload, although means of maximizing itstransmission are not clear. However, it is known that a flat hydraulicperformance curve of the rotary pump induces high changes in flow for a givenchange in pressure head. The aim of this study was to determine geometric pumpparameters responsible for increasing this flow pulse transmission and todemonstrate this increase in vitro. The sensitivity of the performance gradientto blade angles, blade heights, blade clearance, and channel areas were studied. Resulting pressure head, flow, and hydraulic efficiency were analyzed withrespect to textbook designed procedures. Then pumps with comparably "flat" and"steep" performance curves were used to simulate LVAD support in vitro over arange of pump flow rates to observe the transmitted flow pulsatility. It wasfound that an outlet blade angle of 90°, inlet blade angle between 25 and 45°,and large throat area generated a "flatter" performance curve. The transmittedflow pulsatility through a pump with a flat performance curve was 68% higher thanthat of a steep performance curve at a flow rate of 5 L/min. Substantial gains inthe observability of LVAD preload/resident blood volume in the ventricle existthrough the careful selection of specific pump geometries.© 2012, Copyright the Authors. Artificial Organs © 2012, International Center forArtificial Organs and Transplantation and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.