: 16967373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1357. ASAIO J. 2006 Sep-Oct;52(5):501-4.Pulsatile ECMO and VAD: a dual use of a new device in pediatric cardiac patients.Agati S(1), Ciccarello G, Ocello S, Salvo D, Marcelletti C, Undar A, Mignosa C.Author information: (1)Pediatric Cardiac Surgery Unit, San Vincenzo Hospital, Taormina, Italy.The purpose of this investigation was to present the first European clinicalexperience with the new MEDOS DELTASTREAM DP1 used in pulsatile extracorporealmembrane oxygenation (ECMO) or ventricular assist device (VAD) options in thepediatric population. Between January 2002 and April 2006, 11 patients requiredECMO and 5 patients received a left VAD (LVAD) in the San Vincenzo Hospital.Indications were postcardiotomy heart failure in 15 patients and fulminantmyocarditis in one patient. ECMO was established in all patients by cannulationof the right atrium and ascending aorta. LVAD was instituted by cannulation ofthe left atrium and ascending aorta. The DP1, an extracorporeal rotary bloodpump, was used as an ECMO and an LVAD device. The pump features a diagonal-flowimpeller and can be used for both continuous and pulsatile modes of perfusion.Priming volume of the pump was approximately 30 ml, with a flow rate of up to 8l/min. Ten patients were discharged from ECMO and four from VAD. In the ECMOgroup, one patient died of peritonitis while on ECMO and two patients died ondays 3 and 4 after weaning because of persistent pulmonary hypertension and majorneurologic complications. In the VAD group, one patient died of low outputsyndrome 9 days after weaning. A 12-year-old patient was successfully giventransplantation on day 8 of ECMO support and discharged on day 30 after hearttransplant. All other patients were discharged. Three pumps were changed for pumpfailure and one pump was electively replaced because of improper anticoagulation management. No other thromboembolic adverse events occurred. Our results suggest that the MEDOS DELTASTREAM DP1 pulsatile pump system can be used as an ECMO or a VAD support. The opportunity to utilize pulsatile flow in postcardiotomycardiogenic shock significantly improved the outcomes by producing morephysiologic hemodynamics and superior end organ function. Easy implantation andsimple management of this device represents the major advantage.