: 11265844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1760. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2001 Mar;19(3):302-6.Expanded polytetrafluoroethylene membranes to wrap surfaces of circulatorysupport devices in patients undergoing bridge to heart transplantation.Leprince P(1), Rahmati M, Bonnet N, Bors V, Rama A, Léger P, Gandjbakhch I, PavieA.Author information: (1)Service de Chirurgie Thoracique et Cardiovasculaire, Groupe HospitalierPitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83 Bd de l'Hôpital, 75651 Cedex 13, Paris, France.pascal.leprince@psl.ap-hop-paris.frOBJECTIVE: Because of a lack of donor hearts, an increasing number of patientswith heart failure must now undergo bridge to cardiac transplantation with amechanical circulatory support device. Moreover, support periods have becomelonger. As a result, pericardial adhesions may develop while the support deviceis implanted, increasing the risk of injury at resternotomy and bleeding aftertransplantation. Use of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) pericardialsubstitutes (membranes) may prevent such adhesions.PATIENTS AND METHODS: From January 1997 to December 1999, ePTFE membranes wereused in 23 patients to wrap portions of an implanted left ventricular assistdevice (LVAD) or total artificial heart (TAH). Any complications duringmechanical support or at cardiac transplantation were recorded. Six ePTFEmembranes removed at transplantation were studied histologically.RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: At resternotomy for transplantation, the plane ofdissection between tissues, ePTFE membranes, and surfaces of the mechanicalsupport device were easily discerned. No adhesions were observed between tissues and membranes. There were no injuries during resternotomy and no patient had toundergo reoperation because of bleeding. One patient given a TAH had an infectionduring circulatory support that was controlled by antibiotic therapy. In another patient, clots developed between the device and an ePTFE membrane; these wereremoved successfully. Histologic studies of removed ePTFE membranes showed noinfiltration of the membranes interstices by collagen or cellular components. Useof ePTFE membranes in patients undergoing bridge to transplantation with eitheran LVAD or a TAH limited adhesions between tissues and device surfaces withoutincreasing the risk of infection.