: 22236814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]683. Artif Organs. 2012 Jun;36(6):555-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.2011.01403.x. Epub2012 Jan 12.Management of single-ventricle patients with Berlin Heart EXCOR VentricularAssist Device: single-center experience.Mackling T(1), Shah T, Dimas V, Guleserian K, Sharma M, Forbess J, Ardura M,Gross-Toalson J, Lee Y, Journeycake J, Barnes A.Author information: (1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Texas Southwestern MedicalCenter and Children's Medical Center Dallas, TX 75235, USA.tracey.mackling@childrens.comThere are minimal data regarding chronic management of single-ventricleventricular assist device (VAD) patients. This study aims to describe ourcenter's multidisciplinary team management of single-ventricle patients supportedlong term with the Berlin Heart EXCOR Pediatric VAD. Patient #1 was a 4-year-old with double-outlet right ventricle with aortic atresia, L-looped ventricles, and heart block who developed heart failure 1 year after Fontan. She initiallyrequired extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support and was transitioned toBerlin Heart systemic VAD. She was supported for 363 days (cardiac intensive careunit [CICU] 335 days, floor 28 days). The postoperative course was complicated byintermittent infection including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,intermittent hepatic and renal insufficiencies, and transient antithrombin,protein C, and protein S deficiencies resulting in multiple thrombi. She had atotal of five pump changes over 10 months. Long-term medical management included anticoagulation with enoxaparin, platelet inhibition with aspirin anddipyridamole, and antibiotic prophylaxis using trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Shedeveloped sepsis of unknown etiology and subsequently died from multiorganfailure. Patient #2 was a 4-year-old with hypoplastic left heart syndrome whodeveloped heart failure 2 years after bidirectional Glenn shunt. At systemic VAD implantation, he was intubated with renal insufficiency. Post-VAD implantation,his renal insufficiency resolved, and he was successfully extubated to daytimenasal cannula and biphasic positive airway pressure at night. He was supportedfor 270 days (CICU 143 days, floor 127 days). The pump was upsized to a 50-mLpump in May 2011 for increased central venous pressures (29 mm Hg). Long-termmedical management included anticoagulation with warfarin and single-agentplatelet inhibition using dipyridamole due to aspirin resistance. He developedincreased work of breathing requiring intubation, significant anasarca, andbleeding from the endotracheal tube. The family elected to withdraw support.Although both patients died prior to heart transplantation, a consistentspecialized multidisciplinary team approach to the medical care of our VADpatients, consisting of cardiothoracic surgeons, heart transplant team,hematologists, pharmacists, infectious disease physicians, psychiatrists,specialty trained bedside nursing, and nurse practitioners, allowed us to manage these patients long term while awaiting heart transplantation.© 2012, Copyright the Authors. Artificial Organs © 2012, International Center forArtificial Organs and Transplantation and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.