: 21464151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]821. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2011 May;26(3):245-55. doi: 10.1097/HCO.0b013e328345af13.Left ventricular assist device unloading effects on myocardial structure andfunction: current status of the field and call for action.Drakos SG(1), Kfoury AG, Selzman CH, Verma DR, Nanas JN, Li DY, Stehlik J.Author information: (1)UTAH Cardiac Transplant Program, Division of Cardiology, University of UtahSchool of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. stavros.drakos@u2m2.utah.eduPURPOSE OF REVIEW: Myocardial remodeling driven by excess pressure and volumeload is believed to be responsible for the vicious cycle of progressivemyocardial dysfunction in chronic heart failure. Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs), by providing significant volume and pressure unloading, allow a reversalof stress-related compensatory responses of the overloaded myocardium. Herein, wesummarize and integrate insights from studies which investigated how LVADunloading influences the structure and function of the failing human heart.RECENT FINDINGS: Recent investigations have described the impact of LVADunloading on key structural features of cardiac remodeling - cardiomyocytehypertrophy, fibrosis, microvasculature changes, adrenergic pathways andsympathetic innervation. The effects of LVAD unloading on myocardial function,electrophysiologic properties and arrhythmias have also been generatingsignificant interest. We also review information describing the extent andsustainability of the LVAD-induced myocardial recovery, the important advances inunderstanding of the pathophysiology of heart failure derived from such studies, and the implications of these findings for the development of new therapeuticstrategies. Special emphasis is given to the great variety of fundamentalquestions at the basic, translational and clinical levels that remain unanswered and to specific investigational strategies aimed at advancing the field.SUMMARY: Structural and functional reverse remodeling associated with LVADscontinues to inspire innovative research. The ultimate goal of theseinvestigations is to achieve sustained recovery of the failing human heart.PMCID: PMC3714229