: 20132950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]998. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010 Jan;29(1):117-24. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2009.09.017.Reversible regulation of the retinoblastoma protein/E2F-1 pathway during "reversecardiac remodelling" after ventricular unloading.Wohlschlaeger J(1), Schmitz KJ, Takeda A, Takeda N, Vahlhaus C, Stypmann J,Schmid C, Baba HA.Author information: (1)Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, University Hospital Essen,University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.BACKGROUND: Cyclin D1, the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein, and the E2F transcriptionfactors are involved in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy. Cyclin D1/cdk4complexes, by phosphorylation, inactivate Rb, thereby abrogating itsgrowth-inhibitory effect. Ventricular unloading is associated with reversibleregulation of numerous cardiomyocyte molecular systems and decreased hypertrophy.Accordingly, the hypothesis whether the Rb/E2F-1 pathway is altered byventricular unloading was tested, and correlations with the cyclin D1 proteinexpression and cardiomyocyte diameters were explored.METHODS: In 21 paired myocardial samples (before and after unloading) frompatients with congestive heart failure (CHF), cyclin D1, phosphorylated Rb (pRb),its homologues p107 and p130 (pocket proteins), and E2F-1 wereimmunohistochemically investigated and morphometrically quantified. Cardiomyocytediameters were morphometrically determined.RESULTS: Cyclin D1 and the proteins of the Rb/E2F-1 pathway were significantlyincreased during CHF compared with controls and were significantly decreasedafter unloading. Cyclin D1, pRb, and p130 protein expression correlatedsignificantly with cardiomyocyte diameters. A significant positive correlationwas noted between the pocket proteins, E2F-1, and cyclin D1.CONCLUSION: Increased protein expression of phosphorylated (inactivated) Rb andthe pocket proteins is associated with cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in CHF. Rbinactivation might be explained by phosphorylation by increased numbers of cyclinD1/cdk4 complexes associated with cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. However, ventricularunloading can reversibly regulate this process. These data underscore theimportance of cell cycle regulatory proteins in the pathogenesis ofCHF-associated (maladaptive) cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and might offer novelclues for pharmacologic approaches of congestive heart failure.Copyright (c) 2010 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.