: 17178345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1336. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2006 Dec;25(12):1413-9.A quantitative gene expression profile of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPS) andtheir inhibitors (TIMPS) in the myocardium of patients with deteriorating heartfailure requiring left ventricular assist device support.Felkin LE(1), Birks EJ, George R, Wong S, Khaghani A, Yacoub MH, Barton PJ.Author information: (1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, Heart ScienceCentre, Harefield, Middlesex.BACKGROUND: Mechanisms underlying the rapid deterioration of heart failurepatients who subsequently require left ventricular assist device (LVAD) supportare poorly understood. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and the tissue inhibitorsof metalloproteinases (TIMPs) play a key role in myocardial remodelling and heartfailure. We hypothesized that MMP and TIMP expression would be altered in thesepatients.METHODS: Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to measure myocardialmessenger RNA levels of MMP1 to MMP14, TIMP1 to TIMP4, collagen I and collagenIII in 24 dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) patients with deteriorating clinicalstatus who required LVAD support (LVAD Group) and in 7 stable DCM patientsundergoing transplantation without need for LVAD support (Tx Group).RESULTS: Levels of MMP1, MMP8 and TIMP4 were higher in the LVAD Group comparedwith the Tx Group (188% +/- 141%, 646% +/- 432%, and 66% +/- 33% higher,respectively, p < 0.05) whereas MMP2, MMP9, MMP10, MMP11, and MMP14 levels weresimilar. MMP3, MMP7, MMP12, and MMP13 were undetectable. All TIMPs were generallyhigher in the LVAD group, but only TIMP4 reached significance. Collagen I and IIIwere not altered. We tested for correlations between MMP and TIMP expression withmyocardial cytokine levels. MMP8 correlated positively with interleukin-6 andinterleukin-1beta, suggesting a link between cytokines and MMPs in thesepatients.CONCLUSIONS: The data show that high myocardial collagenase (MMP1 and MMP8)expression without compensatory changes in collagen or TIMP expression is afeature of patients requiring LVAD support. This may be linked in part toelevated cytokine expression and suggests collagenase activity may be animportant therapeutic target in deteriorating heart failure.