: 10072231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1869. Cardiol Clin. 1998 Nov;16(4):727-37.Surgical therapy for dilated cardiomyopathy.Starling RC(1), Young JB.Author information: (1)Section of Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplant Medicine, George M. and Linda H. Kaufman Center for Heart Failure, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio, USA.STARLIR@cesmtp.ccf.orgAs the next millennium approaches, excitement and promise characterize the futureof dilated cardiomyopathy. Until recently, dilated cardiomyopathy was considered an incurable, uniformly fatal chronic disease. Epidemiologic studies havedemonstrated that at least a quarter of patients with recent onset of symptomswith cardiomyopathy manifest spontaneous improvement and a sustained favorableprognosis. It is imperative that patients who present with new-onsetcardiomyopathy be managed medically and closely followed. Medical treatmentremains the foundation of therapy, and certainly the advent of beta-blocker usemay herald further benefit beyond that observed with conventional therapy (ACEinhibitors and digoxin). Unless mechanical support is required for hemodynamicinstability and end organ failure, patients should be treated medically andobserved. As discussed earlier, transient mechanical support as a bridge torecovery should be considered in the appropriate clinical scenario beforecommitting to cardiac transplantation. Patients with established disease who havebeen followed for extended periods (> 6 months) that have progressive symptomsdespite optimal medical therapy should be considered for surgical therapies.Cardiac transplantation is available to only a minority of the diseasedpopulation. All newer modalities of surgical unloading therapy theoreticallyreduce wall stress. Clearly in dilated cardiomyopathy, ventricular performance isreduced; however, individual myocyte contractile function may be intact. Studies of isolated myocytes (which are unloaded) have yielded conflicting data; however,if contractile function is intact and performance is reduced primarily secondary to abnormal loading conditions, surgical unloading therapies should yieldbenefit. Hence the thesis of Batista that geometric alteration will improveperformance assumes intrinsic integrity of the myocyte contractile function. The implication of intrinsic myocyte contractile dysfunction is that surgicalremodeling does not yield improved ventricular performance. Although clinicianshave learned that selection criteria appear to play a role in predictingbeneficial outcomes with cardiomyoplasty and the Batista procedure, clinicaltechniques to assess the integrity of myocyte function are unsophisticated.Quantifying interstitial fibrosis, assays for the degree of apoptosis, andvarious immunologic measures currently do not provide the insight necessary topredict outcomes reliably. The future assessment of dilated cardiomyopathy andthe decision to consider alternative surgical procedures versus cardiactransplantation will likely be determined by biomolecular studies. At present,these new surgical procedures are promising therapies and potential alternatives to cardiac transplantation. Controlled studies to determine the clinical andsurvival benefit compared with medical therapy will ultimately be required, afterthe surgical techniques and patient selection criteria are refined. Randomized,prospective controlled studies assessing LVAD therapy and cardiomyoplasty are in progress.