: 24672699  [PubMed]213. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2014 Jul;19(1):41-8. doi: 10.1093/icvts/ivu078. Epub 2014 Mar 25.The cost impact of short-term ventricular assist devices and extracorporeal life support systems therapies on the National Health Service in the UK.Borisenko O(1), Wylie G(2), Payne J(3), Bjessmo S(4), Smith J(5), Firmin R(6),Yonan N(7).Author information: (1)Synergus AB, Danderyd, Sweden oleg.borisenko@synergus.com. (2)ScottishExtracorporeal Life Support Service, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow,UK. (3)Scottish National Advanced Heart Failure Service, Golden Jubilee National Hospital, Clydebank, UK. (4)Synergus AB, Danderyd, Sweden Department of Learning,Informatics, Management and Ethics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.(5)Paediatric and Neonatal ECMO Service, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne,UK. (6)Glenfield General Hospital, Leicester, UK. (7)Department of CardiothoracicTransplant, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, UK.OBJECTIVES: The objective of the study was to assess the cost of using different blood pumps for short-term ventricular assist device (VAD) and extracorporeallife support (ECLS) systems for cardiac and cardiorespiratory failure in the UK.METHODS: The cost analysis presented was based on evaluation of the time requiredto provide circulatory support for the following indications: post-cardiacsurgery cardiogenic shock, postacute myocardial infarction cardiogenic shock,deteriorating end-stage heart failure (ESHF) and the ability of different bloodpumps to provide support for the necessary duration. The maximum length ofsupport for each device was based on the manufacturers' recommendations. Directmedical cost of each treatment was evaluated only for the period of mechanicalcirculatory support in adults and children. Only the cost of device, placementand replacement procedures were considered. List prices were used for devices;resource use was based on expert opinion; unit costs were obtained from official UK sources and Wythenshawe hospital, Manchester, UK. Hospital perspective wasutilized for analysis. Three VADs were selected for comparison in adults and two in children. Four centrifugal ECLS systems were selected for comparison in adultsand two in children.RESULTS: In both VAD and ECLS indications, the CentriMag® was the least expensivewhen used for support of patients with end-stage heart failure. Compared withCardiohelp® for ECLS (which has the same maximum claim duration of support of 30 days), CentriMag® lead to cost savings of £4294 per patient in all three clinicalconditions considered. In post-cardiac surgery cardiogenic shock, CentriMag® VAD lead to savings of £5014 per patient compared with BPX-80. Results were robust inone-way sensitivity analysis in comparison with Cardiohelp®.CONCLUSIONS: CentriMag® and PediVAS® blood pumps can lead to significant costsavings to the National Health Service, when used instead of other pumps forshort-term VAD or ECLS treatment.© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the EuropeanAssociation for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.