: 19303790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1112. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2009 Mar;7(3):259-62. doi: 10.1586/14779072.7.3.259.Multidisciplinary approach for circulatory support in patients with advancedheart failure.El-Menyar AA(1).Author information: (1)Weill Cornell Medical School (Qatar) & HMC, Hamad General Hospital, CardiologyDepartment, Doha, Qatar. elmenyar@yahoo.comDespite the efficacy of heart-failure (HF) therapy, patients may stilldecompensate and require hospitalization. In addition to the gap betweenguidelines and clinical practice, this highlights the need for amultidisciplinary approach to the management of HF. The third European MechanicalCirculatory Support Summit presented the latest trials and trends in conservativetherapy of end-stage HF (ESHF) and the alternative options over a ten-sessionprogram. The meeting covered topics such as epidemiological trends, different HF registries and guidelines for ESHF therapy. In addition to databases and HFtrials, the presenters discussed the integration of multiple biomarkers in HFstratification, biological solution and embryonic stem cells for HF therapy,up-to-date myocardial recovery and the surgical aspects of ESHF treatment.Therapeutic options following short-term left ventricular support were discussed,such as: which patients should receive a ventricular assist device (VAD) andwhen; what the perfect window for implantation of a VAD is; bridge-to-bridge and device selection; VAD-weaning criteria; left ventricular unloading,patient-device matching (short-term device), cardiac transplantation followingshort-term support. There was a device update, presenting Circulite, AbiomedImpella, Levacor, Levitronix, VentrAssist, Heartmate II, DuraHeart and Heartware.Finally, the International VAD registry, European VAD registry and TheInternational Society for Heart & Lung Transplantation Mechanical CirculatoryDevice database were also discussed. Herein, a commentary is givenon some of the interesting topics that indicate the importance of the community, the physicianand the patient's awareness of HF, the utilization of the updated guidelines and landmark studies and registries, as well as recent evidence-based modalities inthe management of ESHF.