: 24565254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]246. Circ Heart Fail. 2014 May;7(3):470-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.000807.Epub 2014 Feb 21.Comparative survival and cost-effectiveness of advanced therapies for end-stageheart failure.Long EF(1), Swain GW(1), Mangi AA(2).Author information: (1)From Decisions, Operations & Technology Management, UCLA Anderson School ofManagement, Los Angeles, CA (E.F.L.); Department of Surgery, Icahn School ofMedicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY (G.W.S.); and Section of Cardiac Surgery,Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT (A.A.M.). (2)FromDecisions, Operations & Technology Management, UCLA Anderson School ofManagement, Los Angeles, CA (E.F.L.); Department of Surgery, Icahn School ofMedicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY (G.W.S.); and Section of Cardiac Surgery,Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT (A.A.M.).abeel.mangi@yale.edu.BACKGROUND: Treatment options for end-stage heart failure includeinotrope-dependent medical therapy, orthotopic heart transplantation (OHT), left ventricular assist device (LVAD) as destination therapy or bridge to transplant.METHODS AND RESULTS: We developed a state-transition model to simulate 4treatment options and associated morbidity and mortality. Transitionprobabilities, costs, and utilities were estimated from published sources.Calculated outcomes included survival, quality-adjusted life-years, andincremental cost-effectiveness. Sensitivity analyses were performed on modelparameters to test robustness. Average life expectancy for OHT-eligible patients is estimated at 1.1 years, with 39% surviving to 1 year. OHT with a median waittime of 5.6 months is estimated to increase life expectancy to 8.5 years, andcosts <$100,000/quality-adjusted life-year gained, relative to inotrope-dependentmedical therapy. Bridge to transplant-LVAD followed by OHT further is estimatedto increase life expectancy to 12.3 years, for $226,000/quality-adjustedlife-year gained versus OHT. Among OHT-ineligible patients, mean life expectancy with inotrope-dependent medical therapy is estimated at 9.4 months, with 26%surviving to 1 year. Patients who instead received destination therapy-LVAD areestimated to live 4.4 years on average from extrapolation of recent constanthazard rates beyond the first year. This strategy costs $202,000/quality-adjustedlife-year gained, relative to inotrope-dependent medical therapy. Patient's age, time on wait list, and costs associated with care influence outcomes.CONCLUSIONS: Under most scenarios, OHT prolongs life and is cost effective ineligible patients. Bridge to transplant-LVAD is estimated to offer >3.8additional life-years for patients waiting ≥6 months, but does not meetconventional cost-effectiveness thresholds. Destination therapy-LVADsignificantly improves life expectancy in OHT-ineligible patients. However,further reductions in adverse events or improved quality of life are needed fordestination therapy-LVAD to be cost effective.© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.