: 16967375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1356. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 Sep;54(6):381-7.Differential gene expression in response to ventricular unloading in rat andhuman myocardium.Doenst T(1), Bugger H, Leippert S, Barleon B, Marme D, Beyersdorf F.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Albert-Ludwigs University of Freiburg,Freiburg i. Br., Germany. doenst@ch11.ukl.uni-freiburg.deLeft ventricular unloading by mechanical assist devices induces myocardialatrophy. We aimed to systematically identify differentially expressed genes in a model of physiological atrophy (unloading of healthy rat myocardium) and compare these changes to those in a unloaded, failing human heart.METHODS: Atrophy in rathearts was induced by heterotopic transplantation of a donor heart into theabdomen of an isogenic recipient. After one week, donor and recipient RNA wasisolated. Differential gene expression was assessed by subtractive hybridization.Two screens with radioactive probes were performed to verify differentiallyexpressed clones. Positive clones were sequenced and cDNA of genes of knownhomology were used as probes for hybridization with RNA from separate atrophiedrat hearts and human tissue from a normal, failing or failing and unloaded leftventricle.RESULTS: We picked 1880 clones from the subtractive hybridization procedure(940/940: forward/reverse runs assessing up- or down-regulation, respectively).The first screen verified 465/140 and the second screen verified 67/30 clones.24/23 clones were sequenced and 14/10 homologies to known genes were found. Inthe atrophied heart, respiratory chain and metabolic genes were down-regulated(NADH-DH, cytochrome c oxidase, acetyl-CoA synthetase, myoglobin) and cellularrecognition and stress genes were up-regulated (MHC1 and 2, HSP70). In the human heart, cytochrome c oxidase, acetyl-CoA synthetase, and myoglobin expression was increased in the failing heart and returned to normal with unloading. Unloadingalso resulted in up-regulation of HSP70.CONCLUSIONS: The genetic responses of failing human and healthy rat myocardium tomechanical unloading show similarities that appear to be independent of speciesdifferences and/or underlying disease. Thus, heterotopic heart transplantation isa relevant model for investigating the mechanisms of mechanical unloading.