: 11016509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1790. ASAIO J. 2000 Sep-Oct;46(5):569-72.Survival outcomes of patients with giant cell myocarditis bridged by ventricular assist devices.Brilakis ES(1), Olson LJ, Berry GJ, Daly RC, Loisance D, Zucker M, Cooper LT Jr.Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.Giant cell myocarditis is a highly lethal disorder characterized by rapidlyprogressive congestive heart failure. The aim of this study was to describe theclinical course of patients with giant cell myocarditis who received aventricular assist device. Patients with giant cell myocarditis were identifiedfrom the Multicenter Giant cell Myocarditis Registry. Bridging to cardiactransplantation in the giant cell myocarditis patients who received a ventricularassist device was compared with bridging in the general population of heartfailure patients, as reported in the literature. Median posttransplantationsurvival for patients with giant cell myocarditis who received and did notreceive ventricular assist devices was calculated by the Kaplan-Meier method and compared with use of the log-rank test. Nine patients with giant cell myocarditiswho received ventricular assist devices were identified. Seven patients survived to transplantation, four were alive 30 days posttransplantation, and two survivedto 1 year. The rate of successful bridging to transplantation in seven of ninepatients (78%) is similar to that reported for other ventricular assist devicerecipients. Posttransplantation survival of 57% (4 of 7) at 30 days and 29% (2 of7) at 1 year was significantly lower compared with 93% 1-year survival of the 30 patients with giant cell myocarditis who did not receive ventricular assistdevices before transplantation (p<0.001). Ventricular assist devices can be aneffective bridge to transplantation for patients with heart failure caused bygiant cell myocarditis. Although their posttransplantation survival was poor inour series, a few patients had long-term survival.