: 10925631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1809. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000 Aug;120(2):393-400.Mechanical support with microaxial blood pumps for postcardiotomy leftventricular failure: can outcome be predicted?Meyns B(1), Sergeant P, Wouters P, Casselman F, Herijgers P, Daenen W, BogaertsK, Flameng W.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, the Department of Cardiac Anesthesiology, andthe Biostatistical Center, KU Leuven, Belgium. bart.meyns@uz.kuleuven.ac.beOBJECTIVE: We sought to identify the indications of mechanical support inpostcardiotomy left ventricular failure in patients who are unable to undergotransplantation.METHODS: From 1989 through 1997, 61 patients with postcardiotomy left ventricularfailure beyond intra-aortic balloon pumping were assisted with the Hemopumpcardiac assist system (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minn). Their mean age was 64 +/- 8years. Comorbidity was prevalent; 47% underwent cardiac massage before pumpsupport, and evolving myocardial infarction was diagnosed in 43% before surgery. Multivariable logistic regression of data known at the moment of pump insertionwas performed to identify the risk factors for mortality.RESULTS: Sixty-five percent of the patients were weaned from the device, but only30% were discharged home. Cardiac index evolution during the first hours afterpump insertion (P <.001) is the only independent predictor for possibility towean from the device in the multivariable analysis. Acute renal failure is theonly variable retained in the model for 90-day mortality. Device-relatedcomplications were far more frequent with the femoral (54%) than with thetransthoracic (6%) cannula. Only 13% of the patients had bleeding complications.CONCLUSIONS: One third of the patients with postcardiotomy heart failurerefractory to use of the intra-aortic balloon pump can be saved with the use ofan endovascular axial flow pump. It is impossible to predict lethal outcome onpreoperative data alone. The early hemodynamic response to support seems to berelated to functional recovery of the heart and subsequent weaning from thedevice.