: 9027108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1973. Int Anesthesiol Clin. 1996 Spring;34(2):85-94.Cardiac assist devices.Hill AG(1), Groom RC, Burton NA, Lefrak EA.Author information: (1)Virginia Heart Center at Fairfax Hospital, Falls Church, USA.The two primary goals of mechanical circulatory support are to provide adequateperfusion of the vital organs and to decrease cardiac work. The support of themyocardium is in an effort to cause a reversal of cardiac damage. The recoveryprocess apparently takes place in two stages. Initially, there is a rapidfunctional recovery of cells in marginally ischemia areas. Then there is a slowerprocess of hypertrophy of normal and recovering myofibers. The process involvesthe reversal of interstitial and of intercellular myocardial edema in areas ofviable myocardium while halting the extension of necrosis into reversiblyischemic areas. It appears that this process is extended from 3 to 5 days, andfunctional recovery can occur for up to 2 weeks. After a 2-week period, thereappears to be little functional recovery of myocardial cells. In autopsy seriesof nonsurvivors, it appears that most of the patients had suffered frombiventricular failure. Biventricular failure appears to be one of the more commoncomplications of the support patient. Right ventricular failure will be attemptedto be supported by right ventricular assist devices. The right ventricular assistdevice, unfortunately, adds a level of complication to the recovery process forthe bridge-to-transplant or cardiomyopathy patient. The patients who are involvedin support fall into three categories: (1) the bridge-to-transplant patient, (2) the patient recovering from postcardiotomy, and (3) the patient who recovers froman acute myocardial insult. It appears that after 2 weeks the recovery period forall of these groups demonstrates no further functional recovery. Thebridge-to-transplant patients usually need to be supported until the transplantoccurs. The postcardiotomy patient and the acute myocardial failure patient arethe most disappointing support group, since they have a higher morbidity andmortality, and a lower chance of recovery. Salvage rates appear to be inapproximately the 25% range in the acute insult category.