: 25441790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]84. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2015 Mar;149(3):927-32. doi:10.1016/j.jtcvs.2014.10.104. Epub 2014 Nov 1.Alternative right ventricular assist device implantation technique for patientswith perioperative right ventricular failure.Saeed D(1), Maxhera B(2), Kamiya H(2), Lichtenberg A(2), Albert A(2).Author information: (1)Clinic for Cardiovascular Surgery, Heinrich-Heine University of Düsseldorf,Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address: diyar.saeed@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.(2)Clinic for Cardiovascular Surgery, Heinrich-Heine University of Düsseldorf,Düsseldorf, Germany.OBJECTIVES: Temporary right ventricular assist devices (RVADs) may be required tosupport patients with perioperative refractory right ventricular failure (RVF).We report on our experience using a different technique of RVAD implantation thatdoes not necessitate resternotomy at the time of RVAD removal.METHODS: Patients with perioperative RVF who underwent temporary RVADimplantation between January 2010 and February 2014 were reviewed. A dacron graftwas attached to the pulmonary artery and passed through a subxiphoid exit, where the RVAD outflow cannula was inserted. The inflow cannula was percutaneouslycannulated in the femoral vein, and the sternum was primarily closed. On the day of RVAD explantation, the outflow graft of the RVAD was pulled and ligated, andthe insertion site was secondarily closed. The RVAD inflow cannula was removed,and direct pressure was applied.RESULTS: Twenty-one patients (age 58 ± 14 years) were supported. Seventeenpatients (81%) had RVF after left ventricular assist device implantation, and 4patients developed postcardiotomy RVF. The median duration of RVAD support was 9 days (range: 2-88 days). Eleven patients (52%) were successfully weaned from the RVAD. Two patients were bridged to transplantation. Eight patients died on leftventricular assist device and/or RVAD support. The survival rates to discharge orheart transplantation, and to 1-year, were 62% and 52%, respectively.CONCLUSIONS: No technical issues were encountered in this large series of RVADimplantations using the described technique for various forms of postoperativeRVF. Extended support duration and reduction of resternotomy risks may be themain advantages of this technique compared with conventional RVAD implantationmethods.Copyright © 2015 The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. Published byElsevier Inc. All rights reserved.