: 2651615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2137. Tex Heart Inst J. 1989;16(1):46-50.Use of a left ventricular assist device as a bridge to transplantation in apediatric patient.Frazier OH(1), Bricker JT, Macris MP, Cooley DA.Author information: (1)The Division of Surgery, Section of Cardiac Transplantation, Texas HeartInstitute, Houston, Texas, USA.Despite many advances in heart transplantation and in mechanical circulatorysupport, the benefits of staged cardiac transplantation have not been extended tothe pediatric transplant recipient, chiefly because implantable circulatoryassist devices are still too large. Extracorporeal devices, however, can overcomethis impediment. Here we report the 1st case, to our knowledge, in which anextracorporeal left ventricular assist device has been used in a child to supportcirculation prior to cardiac transplantation. The patient was a 9-year-old boy inNew York Heart Association functional class IV, with congestive heart failure as a result of idiopathic biventricular cardiomegaly. In mid-May of 1987, whileawaiting a suitable donor, he suffered severe oliguria after an episode ofcirculatory arrest. Therefore we decided to maintain his circulation-andconsequently his peripheral organ function-with an extracorporeal leftventricular assist device. After establishing cardiopulmonary bypass undernormothermia and without cardiac arrest, we established flow from the leftventricle through a 36-Fr wire-reinforced straight cannula to a Biomedicus BP-80 centrifugal force pump, with return to the proximal ascending aorta through a28-Fr wire-reinforced straight cannula. The patient's hemodynamic course undersubsequent mechanical circulatory support was remarkably stable, withcontrollable systemic hypertension and no evidence of hemolysis. Although cardiacactivity was minimal and systemic blood flow nonpulsatile, the patient's renal,pulmonary, and hepatic functions improved, and his peripheral circulation waswell preserved. After 12 hours of support, a donor heart became available, and a routine orthotopic cardiac transplant was performed. Upon removal, the leftventricular assist device showed a small amount of thrombus formation. Thepatient's postoperative recovery has been easily manageable, and 20 months after transplant he enjoys unrestricted physical activity. We conclude that anextracorporeal left ventricular assist device can be used as a bridge to cardiac transplantation in children. Moreover, this application of a continuous forcecentrifugal pump without adverse effect encourages the conclusion that long-term maintenance of terminal heart disease patients might be possible throughdevelopment of small, implantable pumps with the potential of lower powerrequirements and reduced thrombogenesis.PMCID: PMC324843