: 3314931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2151. J Heart Transplant. 1987 May-Jun;6(3):150-4.Mechanical circulatory assistance after heart transplantation.Kanter KR(1), Pennington DG, McBride LR, Miller LW, Swartz MT, Naunheim KS,Willman VL.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, St. Louis University Medical Center, Missouri 63104.Results with mechanical circulatory assistance for the treatment of profoundcardiopulmonary failure after conventional heart surgery have been encouraging.Its usefulness after heart transplantation is not known. Since August 1982, eightpatients (of 59 transplant patients) have required support 0 to 48 hours (mean,19.5 hours) after transplantation. The ages of the patients ranged from 7 days to52 years (mean, 28.4 years). Underlying recipient heart disease was ischemic inthree patients, congenital in two, cardiomyopathic in two, and rheumatic in onepatient. Preoperative North American Transplant Coordinators Organization (NATCO)classification was status 9 in one patient (on extracorporeal membraneoxygenation [ECMO]), status 1 in five patients, and status 3 in two patients.Reasons for graft failure, although usually multifactorial, were primarilypulmonary hypertension with right ventricular failure in five patients andpneumonia, hyperacute rejection, and fat embolus in one patient each. In threepatients, there was a mismatch in graft size (too small in two adults and toolarge in one neonate). Graft ischemic times ranged from 75 to 229 minutes (mean, 171 minutes). Two patients received mechanical support with an intra-aorticballoon (IAB), three with ECMO, and three with a right ventricular assist device (RVAD). One of the patients on ECMO and two of the patients with an RVAD also hadIABs. Duration of support ranged from 4 hours to 8 days (mean, 3.2 days). Initialhemodynamic stability was achieved in all patients. Complications were common,including sepsis in seven patients and kidney failure in five patients. Onlythree patients were weaned. One patient with pulmonary hypertension, who wastreated with ECMO, died 36 hours after being weaned.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250WORDS)