: 23265328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]517. Gen Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2013 Mar;61(3):111-7. doi: 10.1007/s11748-012-0181-5.Epub 2012 Dec 21.Destination therapy: the new gold standard treatment for heart failure patientswith left ventricular assist devices.Yamakawa M(1), Kyo S, Yamakawa S, Ono M, Kinugawa K, Nishimura T.Author information: (1)Department of Therapeutic Strategy for Heart Failure, University of TokyoHospital, Tokyo, Japan.Heart failure continues to be a growing health problem, eluding large-scaleimprovement and treatment. Cardiac transplantation has been the gold standardtreatment with high post-transplant survival rates and relatively good quality oflife. However, there has been an extreme shortage of organ donations, limitingtransplants to only a very small portion of patients with the condition. This ledto a growing interest in alternative options for the increasing population ofpatients who are waitlisted or ineligible for transplantation. In recent years,ventricular assist device (VAD) technologies have advanced from pulsatile bloodpumps to continuous-flow pumps that have demonstrated unprecedentedpost-implantation survival rates. The HeartMate II, the only commerciallyavailable, continuous flow left ventricular assist device (LVAD) in the UnitedStates and Europe, has been implanted in over 10,000 patients worldwide, setting a benchmark for biomedical modalities of advanced heart failure treatment. Thanksto the successes of contemporary LVADs, patients are able to enjoy a betterlifestyle, with a significantly prolonged life span and the ability to regularly partake in physical activities. In this new biomedical generation, the usage ofLVADs has begun to expand towards the treatment for a wider range of heartconditions, including earlier stages of heart failure. In fact, LVADimplantations have surpassed the number of transplants taken place annually. Anincreasing number of patients are considering the permanent, circulatory support with an LVAD, namely destination therapy, as a promising option for treatingheart failure.