: 16962470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1361. Herz. 2006 Aug;31(5):445-54.[Surgical therapy of end-stage heart failure. State of the art 2006].[Article in German]Klotz S(1), Loeher A, Drees G, Scheld HH.Author information: (1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Thorax-, Herz- und Gefässchirurgie,Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster. klotz@ukmuenster.deCardiac transplantation still remains the gold standard despite recent success inorgan-preserving therapy. However, organ shortage forces to process alternativetherapies. Cardiac resynchronization therapy and cardiac contractility modulationare new and promising therapies, which are able either to delay or even preventthe need for cardiac transplantation. High-risk cardiac revascularization andvalve replacement is another important therapy in especially evaluated patients. With newer organ-protective procedures and novel treatment options like theoff-pump bypass surgery, end-stage heart failure could be treated successfully.The volume reduction surgery, the so-called Batista procedure, has its indicationonly in special selected patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. A modifiedprocedure, the surgical ventricular restoration (SVR) therapy, however, has adefinitive potential and is evaluated in a multicenter trial (RESTORE).Mechanical cardiac assist devices have still a high impact in the therapy ofacute or chronic end-stage heart failure. By means of smaller devices with axial rotary blades, the high rates of thromboembolic events, infections and mechanicaldevice complications were significantly reduced. Survival to transplant withmechanical assist device support is nowadays around 80%. New centrifugal pumpsare tested in clinical trials right now. Passive cardiac support devices and the total artificial heart are limited to special indications. The organ shortagecould be overcome with the xenotransplantation. However, the problem ofhyperacute rejection and the risk of transfection of animal diseases limit theclinical use considerably. The cell therapy has probably the highest potentialfor the future. Still unsolved are problems with the potential trigger ofarrhythmias and ethical preconceptions regarding embryonic stem cells. Insummary, cardiac transplantation still remains the gold standard in the therapyof end-stage heart failure with 10-year survival rates of 50%. With increasingdonor shortage a potential combination therapy of organ-preserving cardiacsurgery and cell transplantation might be the future for the 21st century.