: 9527185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1895. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1998 Jan;13(1):78-83.Experimental development of an electrically stimulated biological skeletal muscleventricle for chronic aortic counterpulsation.Girsch W(1), Koller R, Lanmüller H, Rab M, Avanessian R, Schima H, Wolner E,Seitelberger R.Author information: (1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Medical School, Universityof Vienna, Austria.OBJECTIVE: The chronic shortage of donor organs for cardiac transplantation andthe high costs for mechanical assist devices demand the development ofalternative cardiac assist devices for the treatment of severe heart failure.Cardiac assistance by stimulated skeletal muscles is currently investigated assuch a possible alternative. The goal of the presented study was to construct anewly designed biological skeletal muscle ventricle and to evaluate its possible hemodynamic efficacy in an acute sheep model.METHODS: A total of 14 adult sheep were used for acute experiments. The entirethoracic aorta including the aortic root was excised from a donor sheep. Anaorto-pericardial pouch conduit (APPC) was created by enlarging the aorticcircumference in its middle section with two strips of pericardium. Thisbiological conduit was anastomosed in parallel to the descending aorta of arecipient sheep, using the aortic root as an inflow valve to the conduit.Stimulation electrodes were applicated to the thoracodorsal nerve and thelatissimus dorsi muscle was detached from the trunk and wrapped around the pouch.ECG-triggered functional electrical stimulation was applied during cardiacdiastole to simulate aortic counterpulsation. Stimulation was performed duringvarious hemodynamic conditions.RESULTS: A standardised surgical procedure suitable for long term studies wasestablished during six experiments. An APPC, with 70-80 mm filling volume, wasfound to be of optimal size. In another eight experiments, hemodynamicmeasurements were performed. Under stable hemodynamic conditions the stimulation of the biological skeletal muscle ventricle induced a significant increase ofmean arterial pressure by 14% and mean diastolic pressure by 26%. Duringpharmacologically induced periods of cardiac failure, the stimulation of the APPCincreased mean arterial pressure by 13% and mean diastolic pressure by 19%. Inall eight experiments, the diastolic peak pressure reached supra-systolic values during stimulation.CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate the hemodynamic efficacy of this newlydesigned biological skeletal muscle ventricle as an aortic counterpulsationdevice. Chronic experiments using a preconditioned fatigue-resistant muscle will further help to evaluate its possible clinical significance.