: 9615165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1891. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1998 Apr;115(4):904-12.One hundred patients with the HeartMate left ventricular assist device: evolving concepts and technology.McCarthy PM(1), Smedira NO, Vargo RL, Goormastic M, Hobbs RE, Starling RC, Young JB.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, The Cleveland ClinicFoundation, Ohio 44195, USA.BACKGROUND: Implantable left ventricular assist devices are common as a bridge totransplantation but are just reaching their goal as an alternative totransplantation.METHODS: From December 1991 until December 1996, 97 left ventricular assistdevices were implanted as a bridge to transplantation, one as an alternative totransplantation, and two as a bridge to recovery. Included were 64 pneumaticdevices and 36 electric devices. Most patients (69%) had ischemic cardiomyopathy and most (53%) had had previous cardiac surgery. Preoperative circulatory support(extracorporeal membrane oxygenation) was used in 25.RESULTS: Perioperative insertion of a right ventricular assist device was unusual(11%). The mean duration of support with a left ventricular assist device (bridgeto transplantation) was 70 +/- 41 days (up to 206 days). Survival totransplantation was 76%. Cause of death included multiple organ failure (n = 13),perioperative stroke (n = 5), device failure (n = 5), and controller disconnect(n = 1). Significant risk factors for death included (1) preoperative need forventilator or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, (2) elevated blood ureanitrogen, creatinine, or bilirubin, and (3) low pulmonary artery pressures. Risksafter insertion of the left ventricular assist device were reoperation forbleeding, support with a right ventricular assist device, dialysis, or devicefailure. Catastrophic failure of the device occurred 14 times in 12 patients and was treated by emergency pump exchange in six instances. Only two device-related thromboembolic episodes were detected. Positive blood cultures were found in 59% of patients, driveline infection in 28%, and pump infection in 11%.CONCLUSIONS: The HeartMate device provided excellent hemodynamic support with lowdevice-related thromboembolic events. Infection and reliability of the devicecontributed to the high cost of therapy. These areas need to be improved for the left ventricular assist device to attain its goal as a viable alternative totransplantation.