: 17622371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1283. Neth Heart J. 2007;15(2):45-50.End-stage heart failure and mechanical circulatory support: feasibility ofdischarge from hospital.Oosterom A(1), de Jonge N, Kirkels JH, Rodermans BF, Sukkel E, Klöpping C,Ramjankhan F, Lahpor JR.Author information: (1)Heart Lung Centre Utrecht, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, theNetherlands.BACKGROUND.: Due to the shortage of donor hearts, mechanical circulatory support is increasingly being used as a bridge to transplantation. In order to allow for more widespread use of ventricular assist devices it is mandatory that patientsare not continuously hospitalised. We present the results of our experience with patients with end-stage heart failure, discharged from hospital afterimplantation of a ventricular assist device and followed in an outpatientsetting. METHODS.: After an intensive training and education programme, focusing on the management of the percutaneous driveline and instructions on how to handlein case of an alarm or malfunction of the device, patients were discharged. They were followed in the outpatient department. All regular and unplanned visits wereregistered, including readmissions. RESULTS.: Twenty-seven patients treated with a ventricular assist device were discharged from hospital. There were 37 extravisits, of these, 27 were device related resulting in 21 readmissions(0.78/patient). We treated eight infectious episodes in four patients, all devicerelated. Furthermore seven thromboembolic episodes occurred in four patients. Onepatient died because of multiorgan failure seven weeks after he was readmittedwith an urosepsis. In our experience of 11.4 patient years at home while on thedevice, only 5% of the time was spent in hospital for complications. Incomparison with patients on an assist device who stayed in hospital untiltransplantation, there were no more complications. CONCLUSION.: This studydemonstrates that patients with end-stage heart failure, treated with aventricular assist device, can be safely discharged from hospital, with anacceptable rate of readmissions. It results in a fair quality of life, with ahigh degree of independence of the patient. (Neth Heart J 2007;15:45-50.).PMCID: PMC1847752