: 15607666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1505. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2004 Dec;23(12):1359-65.Infection in permanent circulatory support: experience from the REMATCH trial.Holman WL, Park SJ, Long JW, Weinberg A, Gupta L, Tierney AR, Adamson RM, Watson JD, Raines EP, Couper GS, Pagani FD, Burton NA, Miller LW, Naka Y; REMATCHInvestigators.BACKGROUND: This analysis of the REMATCH Trial focuses on infection, which was animportant source of morbidity and mortality. We use the information to suggestways to decrease the incidence and effects of device-related infection.METHODS: Patients were randomized prospectively to receive left ventricularassist devices (LVADs) or optimal medical management (OMM) for end-stage heartfailure. Infection variables included sepsis adjudicated as the cause of death;sepsis reported as a serious adverse event; percutaneous site or pocketinfection; and pump housing, inflow- or outflow-tract infection. We compared the incidence and prevalence of events between groups and generated time-relateddescriptions.RESULTS: Survival with LVAD (n=68 patients) was superior to OMM survival (n=61patients) with a 47% decrease in risk of death (p <0.001), but the aggregateadverse event rate was greater for patients with LVADs (risk ratio, 2.29; 95%confidence interval, 1.85-2.84). Freedom from sepsis in patients with LVADs was58% at 1 year and 48% at 2 years after implantation with superior survival innon-septic patients (60% vs 39% at 1 year and 38% vs 8% at 2 years in non-septic vs septic patients with LVADs, p <0.06). Percutaneous site or pocket infectiondid not affect survival (p=0.86). The hazard for onset of sepsis peaked withinthe first 3 weeks after implantation.CONCLUSIONS: Survival is improved with permanent LVAD implantation compared with OMM therapy. However, infection causes substantial morbidity and mortality.Decreasing infections will increase survival and decrease morbidity in permanent LVAD recipients and will improve the risk-benefit ratio for permanent LVADtherapy.