: 22163132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]697. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012 Jan;31(1):27-36. doi: 10.1016/j.healun.2011.10.012.Neurocognitive function in destination therapy patients receiving continuous-flowvs pulsatile-flow left ventricular assist device support.Petrucci RJ(1), Rogers JG, Blue L, Gallagher C, Russell SD, Dordunoo D, Jaski BE,Chillcott S, Sun B, Yanssens TL, Tatooles A, Koundakjian L, Farrar DJ, Slaughter MS.Author information: (1)Department of Psychiatry, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia,Pennsylvania 19102, USA. ralph.petrucci@drexelmed.eduBACKGROUND: The HeartMate II (Thoratec Corp, Pleasanton, CA) continuous-flow leftventricular assist device (LVAD) improved survival in destination therapy (DT)patients during a randomized trial compared with pulsatile-flow LVADs. This studydocumented changes in cognitive performance in DT patients from that trial todetermine if there were differences between continuous-flow and pulsatile-flowsupport.METHODS: Data were collected in a sub-study from 96 HeartMate II continuous-flow and 30 HeartMate XVE pulsatile-flow LVAD patients from 12 of the 35 trial sitesthat followed the same serial neurocognitive (NC) testing protocol at 1, 3, 6,12, and 24 months after LVAD implantation. Spatial perception, memory, language, executive functions, and processing speed were the domains assessed with 10standard cognitive measures. Differences over time and between LVAD type wereevaluated with linear mixed-effects modeling.RESULTS: From 1 to 24 months after LVAD implantation, changes in NC functionswere stable or showed improvement in all domains, and there were no differencesbetween the continuous-flow and pulsatile-flow groups. Data at 24 months wereonly available from patients with the continuous-flow LVAD due to the limiteddurability of the HeartMate XVE device. There was no decline in any NC domainover the time of LVAD support. Missing data not collected from patients who died could have resulted in a bias toward inflated study results.CONCLUSIONS: The NC performance of advanced heart failure patients supported withcontinuous-flow and pulsatile-flow LVADs shows stabilization or improvementduring support for up to 24 months.Copyright © 2012 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.