: 8561597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1982. Ann Thorac Surg. 1996 Jan;61(1):305-10; discussion 311-3.Experience with right ventricular assist devices for perioperative right-sidedcirculatory failure.Chen JM(1), Levin HR, Rose EA, Addonizio LJ, Landry DW, Sistino JJ, Michler RE,Oz MC.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, ColumbiaUniversity College of Physicians & Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.BACKGROUND: Right-sided circulatory failure remains a significant source ofmorbidity and mortality for both cardiac transplant and left ventricular assistdevice recipients.METHODS: We reviewed our experience with 11 patients who required a rightventricular assist device (RVAD) after either orthotopic heart transplantation orleft ventricular assist device implantation. Variables analyzed included totaltime of RVAD support, hemodynamic and hematologic parameters, and parameters ofend-organ perfusion. These were assessed at five time points: (1) at least 2weeks before RVAD implantation, (2) intraoperatively just before RVAD insertion, (3) while on RVAD support, and, for those who survived, (4) just before RVADexplantation, and (5) off RVAD support. Survival was assessed as the ability tobe weaned successfully from RVAD support. Urine output and serum transaminaselevels were recorded throughout the period of RVAD support.RESULTS: Five patients received an ABIOMED 5000 BVS RVAD, and 6 received aBio-Medicus centrifugal pump. Nine patients in the study underwent orthotopicheart transplantation and had development of right-sided circulatory failure from0 to 96 hours after donor organ insertion, and 2 patients underwent leftventricular assist device implantation 12 to 48 hours before RVAD support. Themean time of RVAD support for survivors was 133.6 +/- 33.6 hours (range, 107 to190 hours). Six patients were successfully separated from RVAD support, and 5patients died while on RVAD support. Causes of death included sepsis (2),biventricular failure (2), and coagulopathy (1). Continuous arteriovenoushemodialysis was employed in 3 of 6 survivors and 1 of 5 nonsurvivors.CONCLUSIONS: Right ventricular assist devices work most effectively if implanted early enough to avoid significant, potentially irreversible end-organ injury. We liberally employ continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis, minimize the use ofheparin immediately postoperatively, keep patients sedated, and continue RVADsupport until the patient displays signs of hemodynamic and end-organ recovery asheralded by (1) a decrease in central venous pressure and, more importantly, adecrease in pulmonary artery diastolic pressure, (2) an increase in urine output,and (3) a decrease in serum transaminase levels.