: 24556808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]249. Artif Organs. 2014 Oct;38(10):829-37. doi: 10.1111/aor.12267. Epub 2014 Feb 17.Pearls and pitfalls in short-term mechanical circulatory assist: how to avoid andmanage complications.Mohite PN(1), Maunz O, Simon AR.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation and Mechanical Support, RoyalBrompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.In today's era, given the worsening risk profiles of patients undergoing cardiac surgery, the increasing number of complex cardiac surgeries, and the increasingnumber of patients undergoing thoracic organ transplantation, short-termmechanical circulatory assist (MCA) devices are indispensable. MCA devices arecapable of supporting heart and lung function and have emerged as potentiallylifesaving instruments, but may prove to be as hazardous as helpful due to their inherent tendency toward hemolysis, thromboembolism, and hemorrhage. Although MCAdevices are being used regularly at some specialized centers, surgeries involvingMCA are not as common as other routine cardiac surgeries, and even thoughprofessionals implanting and maintaining short-term MCAs are well acquainted withoperating such devices, it is not uncommon to come across complications as aresult of minor mistakes committed while dealing with them. Avoiding simplemistakes and taking proper precautions while implanting and maintaining thesedevices can prevent major catastrophes. We discuss commonly encountered problems and complications during the implantation and maintenance of short-term MCAs and offer reasonable and practical solutions. In addition, crucial issues such asanticoagulation, replacement of the device circuit, and management of the distal perfusion cannula are discussed. Continuous and efficient monitoring of the MCAdevice and the patient supported on MCA, together with anticipation and avoidanceof complications, is key for successful short-term MCA support.Copyright © 2014 International Center for Artificial Organs and Transplantationand Wiley Periodicals, Inc.