: 23932442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]375. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2014 Jan-Feb;23(1):17-20. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2013.06.005. Epub 2013 Aug 6.Granulomatous myocarditis in severe heart failure patients undergoingimplantation of a left ventricular assist device.Segura AM(1), Radovancevic R, Demirozu ZT, Frazier OH, Buja LM.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiovascular Pathology Research, Texas Heart Institute at St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital, Houston, TX. Electronic address:asegura@heart.thi.tmc.edu.BACKGROUND: Granulomatous myocarditis may develop into cardiomyopathy and severe congestive heart failure that requires implantation of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD).METHODS: Left ventricular (LV) core samples were collected from 177 patients withsevere heart failure at the time of LVAD implantation, and samples werehistologically examined and graded for severity of hypertrophy and fibrosis.Granulomatous myocarditis incidentally seen in a subset of samples wascharacterized by staining and culturing for mycobacteria and fungi. Variousclinical parameters in these patients were analyzed.RESULTS: Of the 177 LV core samples examined, 6 (3.4%) showed nonnecrotizinggranulomatous inflammation in the myocardial wall. Stains and cultures formycobacteria and fungi were negative. All six patients [three women, three men;five African American, one Asian; mean age, 52±9 years (range, 41-61 years)] had arrhythmias and required an automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator.Before LVAD implantation, the patients' mean cardiac index was 1.8±0.4l/min/m(2); cardiac output, 2.9±0.6 l/min; and ejection fraction, 20±2%. One yearafter LVAD implantation, one patient had undergone heart transplantation. At 2years, a second patient was transplanted, and one died. At 3 years, a thirdpatient was transplanted and died postoperatively; two patients remained onsupport. No clinical evidence indicated involvement of other organs or recurrencein the transplanted patients.CONCLUSION: The incidental diagnosis of granulomatous myocarditis in our patientsindicates that histological study of LV core samples in patients who undergo LVADimplantation may contribute to the diagnosis and be a consideration in themanagement of the underlying cause of heart failure.© 2013.