: 16305636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1431. Health Technol Assess. 2005 Nov;9(45):1-132, iii-iv.The clinical and cost-effectiveness of left ventricular assist devices forend-stage heart failure: a systematic review and economic evaluation.Clegg AJ(1), Scott DA, Loveman E, Colquitt J, Hutchinson J, Royle P, Bryant J.Author information: (1)Southampton Health Technology Assessments Centre, Wessex Institute for Health Research and Development, University of Southampton, UK.OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical and cost-effectiveness of left ventricularassist devices (LVADs) as a bridge to heart transplantation (BTT), as a bridge tomyocardial recovery (BTR) or as a long-term chronic support (LTCS) for peoplewith end-stage heart failure (ESHF).DATA SOURCES: For the systematic review, electronic databases and bibliographies of related publications plus experts and manufacturers. For the economicevaluations, data originated from the systematic review of clinical andcost-effectiveness, UK hospitals, device manufacturers and expert opinion.REVIEW METHODS: For the systematic review, studies were selected and assessedagainst a set of rigorous criteria; data were then synthesised using a narrative approach through subgroup analysis based on the indication for treatment, type ofLVAD and quality of studies. The economic evaluation developed two models toevaluate the use of LVADs, first as a BTT and second as LTCS for patientssuffering from ESHF.RESULTS: Sixteen studies assessed the clinical effectiveness of LVADs as a BTT.Despite the poor methodological quality of the evidence, LVADs appearedbeneficial compared to other treatment options (i.e. inotropic agents or usualcare) or to no care (i.e. the natural history of ESHF) improving the survival of people with ESHF during the period of support and following hearttransplantation. Patients supported by an LVAD appeared to have an improvedfunctional status compared with those on usual care and experienced animprovement in their quality of life from before device implantation to theperiod during support. Serious adverse events are a risk for patients with anLVAD. With a scarcity of evidence directly comparing different devices, it isdifficult to identify specific devices as the most clinically effective. TheHeartMate LVAD is the only device that has evidence comparing it with thedifferent alternatives, appearing to be more clinically effective than inotropic agents and usual care and as clinically effective as the Novacor device. Secondgeneration devices, such as Jarvik 2000 and MicroMed Debakey LVADs, are early in their development but show considerable promise that should be assessed throughlong-term studies. Evidence of the clinical effectiveness of LVADs as a BTR waslimited to seven non-comparative observational studies that appeared to show thatthe LVADs were beneficial in providing support until myocardial recovery. It was not possible to assess whether the LVADs are more effective than otheralternatives or specific devices. No evidence was found on the quality of life orfunctional status of patients and limited information on adverse events wasreported. Six studies assessed the clinical effectiveness of LVADs as an LTCS andfrom these it was evident that LVADs provided benefits in terms of improvedsurvival, functional status and quality of life. Nineteen studies assessed thecosts and cost-effectiveness of LVADS for people with ESHF, with the majoritybeing simple costing studies and very few studies of the cost-effectiveness ofLVADs. With no relevant cost-effectiveness studies available, an economicevaluation for BTT and LTCS was developed. The economic evaluation has shown thatneither LVAD indication considered, that is, BTT and LTCS, is a cost-effectiveuse. For the HeartMate LVAD used as a BTT the cost per QALY was pound 65,242. In the less restrictive indication, LTCS, where LVADs are not just given to patientsawaiting transplantation, the analysis has shown that LTCS is not cost-effective.The baseline cost per QALY of the first-generation HeartMate LVAD was pound170,616. One- and multi-way sensitivity analysis had limited effect on the costper QALY. A hypothetical scenario based on the cost of a second-generationMicroMed DeBakey device illustrated that a 60% improvement in survival overfirst-generation devices was necessary before the incremental cost-effectiveness approached pound 40,000 per QALY.CONCLUSIONS: Although the review showed that LVADs are clinically effective as a BTT with ESHF, the economic evaluation indicated that they are notcost-effective. With the limited and declining availability of donor hearts fortransplantation, it appears that the future of the technology is in its use as anLTCS. Further research is needed to examine the clinical effectiveness of LVADsfor people with ESHF, assessing patient survival, functional ability, quality of life and adverse events. Evaluations of the clinical effectiveness of LVADsshould include economic evaluations, as well as data on quality of life,utilities, resources and costs. A systematic review of the epidemiology of ESHFshould be undertaken to assess its potential impact.