: 11983540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1695. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2002 May;21(5):509-15.Assessment of synchrony relationships between the native left ventricle and theHeartMate left ventricular assist device.Maybaum S(1), Williams M, Barbone A, Levin H, Oz M, Mancini D.Author information: (1)Division of Circulatory Physiology, Columbia University, Heart Failure Center,New York, New York 10032, USA. swm17@columbia.eduBACKGROUND: It has been suggested that the cardiac cycle becomes synchronizedwith the LVAD. Synchronization between the left ventricle and the LVAD may beimportant for ventricular unloading and coronary flow. In this study, we assessedthe synchrony between the cardiac and LVAD cycles.METHODS: We studied 24 patients with HeartMate LVAD support. Native heart ratefrom an electrocardiogram and LVAD rate were measured at rest and peak exercise. Three patients underwent simultaneous invasive pressure measurement from the leftventricle and the aorta, and 3 patients underwent simultaneous recording ofelectrocardiogram and LVAD electrical signal.RESULTS: Resting heart rate was significantly higher than LVAD rate (96 +/- 17 vs66 +/- 15 beats [b]/min, p < 0.0001), with no correlation between the 2 (r =0.25). Peak heart rate was significantly higher than LVAD rate (142 +/- 16 vs 102+/- 14 b/min, p < 0.0001), with no correlation observed (r = 0.31). Electricalsignal recording confirmed the absence of cardiac-LVAD synchrony. Pressuremeasurements revealed a cyclical intraventricular pressure variation, determined by the relationship between the cardiac and LVAD cycles. Intraventricularpressure was lowest when left ventricular systole occurred during pump fillingand highest when left ventricular systole occurred during pump ejection.CONCLUSIONS: The cardiac and LVAD cycles are not in synchrony at rest or at peak exercise. However, a cyclical variation in left ventricular pressure exists,dependent upon the phasic relationship of the cardiac-LVAD cycles, whichsignificantly effects ventricular loading. Better understanding of thisrelationship may be important in developing assist devices for optimal leftventricular unloading and improvement of myocardial recovery.