: 10358796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1858. J Heart Lung Transplant. 1999 Apr;18(4):351-7.Improved survival in patients with acute myocarditis using external pulsatilemechanical ventricular assistance.Chen JM(1), Spanier TB, Gonzalez JJ, Marelli D, Flannery MA, Tector KA, CullinaneS, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Columbia University, College of Physicians andSurgeons, New York, New York, USA. jmc23@columbia.eduBACKGROUND: Acute myocarditis remains a disease with a variable clinical course, from full ventricular recovery to complete heart failure; to date, few cases havebeen reported that describe the efficacy of temporary mechanical ventricularassistance for its treatment.METHODS: We evaluated the voluntary world registry with the use of an externalpulsatile ventricular assist device (the ABIOMED BVS 5000 [BVS]) for acutemyocarditis to determine the impact of mechanical ventricular assistance onoutcome. Variables analyzed included patient demographics, serum chemistries, andoverall hemodynamics prior to BVS, while on BVS support, and after BVSexplanation. Postoperative parameters included re-operation, bleeding,respiratory failure, renal failure, and infections, neurologic, or embolicevents.RESULTS: Eighteen patients in the ABIOMED world registry underwent BVSimplantation for myocarditis; 11 (61.1%) had complete pre-operative andhemodynamic data for analysis. Patients were supported for 13.2 +/- 17.0 days,after which time 7 (63.6%) patients survived to explanation of the device and 2(18.2%) underwent transplantation. Elevated admission serum chemistries (bloodureanitrogen [BUN], creatinine, transaminases) and hemodynamics (central venouspressure [CVP], mean pulmonary arterial pressure [PAP], pulmonary capillary wedgepressure [PCW], cardiac index [CI], all normalized during the period of devicesupport. Estimated ejection fractions in the 7 explanted patients ranged between 50 to 60% at routine evaluation 3 years after device removal.CONCLUSIONS: Temporary mechanical ventricular assistance represents anefficacious therapy for acute myocarditis in patients with hemodynamicdecompensation despite maximal medical therapy. Failure to achieve fullventricular recovery while on device support still allows for other surgicalalternatives, including implantation of a long-term implantable ventricularassist device, or cardiac transplantation.