: 17711971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1269. Perfusion. 2007 Mar;22(2):81-6.Optional active compliance chamber performance in a pulmonary artery-pulmonaryartery configured paracorporeal artificial lung.Alpard SK(1), Wang D, Deyo DJ, Smolarz CM, Chambers S, Zwischenberger JB.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX77555-0528, USA.INTRODUCTION: Our group has developed a paracorporeal artificial lung (PAL)attached in a pulmonary artery (PA) to PA in series configuration to addressprofound respiratory failure and serve as a bridge to transplant and/or recovery.We recently designed, developed and converted our passive pre-PAL compliancechamber to an active, synchronized, counterpulsating assist device to relieveright heart strain and offset increased work placed on the right ventricle whenthe PAL is attached. In this study, we evaluated the safety and performance ofboth a valved and non-valved optional active compliance chamber (OACC) in a PA-PAPAL for right heart assistance in normal adult sheep.METHODS: Eleven sheep (30-50 kg) were divided into non-valved OACC (n = 6) andvalved (n = 5) OACC groups. To mimic pulmonary hypertension, a C-clamp was placeddistal to the OACC-PAL and occluded until a 20% decrease in cardiac output (CO)was achieved. The OACC was activated, and right ventricular pressure (RVP),pulmonary artery pressure (PAP), mean arterial pressure (MAP) and CO wererecorded.RESULTS: All eleven animals tolerated the implantation of the OACC PAL.Activation of the OACC resulted in a significant increase in CO. Systolic anddiastolic right ventricular pressure decreased in both groups. Lastly,counterpulsation increased the mean PAP in all animals and peak PAP reached 89mmHg. Despite providing right heart assistance, synchronizing thecounterpulsation was technically difficult, and the high peak PA pressuresresulted in anastomotic bleeding in all animals and anastomotic breakdown in 4/11animals.CONCLUSIONS: An OACC PAL perfused by the right ventricle applied in series withthe pulmonary circulation reduces ventricular load and improves cardiacefficiency. These preliminary data suggest the potential of an artificial lung inunloading the strained right ventricle and acting as a bridge to transplantation.The augmented peak PA pressures, resulting in bleeding and anastomotic breakdown,and complexity in synchronizing the cardiac cycle with the pulsations of theaugmented OACC, compromise this configuration.