: 18002136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1251. Circulation. 2007 Nov 27;116(22):2571-9. Epub 2007 Nov 12.Dynamic regulation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase-gamma activity andbeta-adrenergic receptor trafficking in end-stage human heart failure.Perrino C(1), Schroder JN, Lima B, Villamizar N, Nienaber JJ, Milano CA, NagaPrasad SV.Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.BACKGROUND: Downregulation of beta-adrenergic receptors (betaARs) underconditions of heart failure requires receptor targeting of phosphoinositide3-kinase (PI3K)-gamma and redistribution of betaARs into endosomal compartments. Because support with a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) results insignificant improvement of cardiac function in humans, we investigated theeffects of mechanical unloading on regulation of PI3Kgamma activity andintracellular distribution of betaARs. Additionally, we tested whetherdisplacement of PI3Kgamma from activated betaARs would restore agonistresponsiveness in failing human cardiomyocytes.METHODS AND RESULTS: To test the role of PI3K on betaAR endocytosis in failinghuman hearts, we assayed for PI3K activity in human left ventricular samplesbefore and after mechanical unloading (LVAD). Before LVAD, failing human heartsdisplayed a marked increase in betaAR kinase 1 (betaARK1)-associated PI3Kactivity that was attributed exclusively to enhanced activity of the PI3Kgammaisoform. Increased betaARK1-coupled PI3K activity in the failing hearts wasassociated with downregulation of betaARs from the plasma membrane and enhancedsequestration into early and late endosomes compared with unmatched nonfailingcontrols. Importantly, LVAD support reversed PI3Kgamma activation, normalized thelevels of agonist-responsive betaARs at the plasma membrane, and depleted thebetaARs from the endosomal compartments without changing the total number ofreceptors (sum of plasma membrane and early and late endosome receptors). To testwhether the competitive displacement of PI3K from the betaAR complex restoredreceptor responsiveness, we overexpressed the phosphoinositide kinase domain ofPI3K (which disrupts betaARK1/PI3K interaction) in primary cultures of failinghuman cardiomyocytes. Adenoviral-mediated phosphoinositide kinase overexpression significantly increased basal contractility and rapidly reconstitutedresponsiveness to beta-agonist.CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest a novel paradigm in which human betaARsundergo a process of intracellular sequestration that is dynamically reversedafter LVAD support. Importantly, mechanical unloading leads to complete reversal in PI3Kgamma and betaARK1-associated PI3K activation. Furthermore, displacementof active PI3K from betaARK1 restores betaAR responsiveness in failing myocytes.