: 25905105  [PubMed]11. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2015 Apr 15. [Epub ahead of print]The Perceptions of Important Elements of Caregiving for a Left Ventricular AssistDevice Patient: A Qualitative Meta-Synthesis.Magid M(1), Jones J, Allen LA, McIlvennan CK, Magid K, Thompson JS, Matlock DD.Author information: (1)Molly Magid High School Student, Colorado Academy, Denver. Jacqueline Jones,PhD, RN Assistant Professor, College of Nursing, University of Colorado, Aurora. Larry A. Allen, MD, MS Assistant Professor, Advanced Heart Failure Specialist,University of Colorado, Aurora, CO. Colleen K. McIlvennan, DNP, ANP AssistantProfessor, Heart Failure Advanced Practice Nurse, School of Medicine, Division ofCardiology, University of Colorado, Aurora. Katie Magid Brown University,Providence, Rhode Island. Jocelyn S. Thompson, MA Professional ResearchAssistant, Colorado Health Outcomes, School of Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora. Daniel D. Matlock, MD, MPH Assistant Professor, Internist, School ofMedicine, Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora.BACKGROUND: The use of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is becomingincreasingly common in patients with end-stage heart failure. Many LVAD programs require patients to have a caregiver before receiving a device. There are fewstudies exploring the experience, burden, and impacts on caregivers of patientswith LVADs.OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to synthesize the qualitative literatureregarding caregiver's perceptions about caring for an adult LVAD patient.METHODS: We searched MEDLINE, CINAHL, PsychInfo, and Web of Science to findEnglish articles on the topic of LVAD caregiver's perceptions. The articles were then synthesized using a formal process of qualitative meta-synthesis.RESULTS: Eight articles met criteria for inclusion. The meta-synthesis across thearticles resulted in 8 themes categorized under 3 domains. Many of the articlessuggested a longitudinal process of caregiving with perceptions largely dependentupon the time of interview in relation to the LVAD. The first domain ofcaregiving is the "early" stage, covering the life before the LVAD through theprocedure. This phase is characterized by the pre-LVAD "emotional rollercoaster,"the decision seen as "no option," and the thought of "leave it [the LVAD] at the hospital." The second domain is the "middle" stage, covering the time frame afterdischarge from the hospital. This phase is characterized by fragility of thepatient, recognition of a need to adapt, and a transformed life. The final domainis "late LVAD" and describes how late in the LVAD process the LVAD indication(bridge to transplant or destination therapy) brings in to focus what isimportant to caregivers.CONCLUSIONS: Existing literature indicates that the LVAD caregiver experience is intense as well as burdensome and entails the need to adapt to a new life. Given the burdens caregivers experience, clinicians and future research should explore strategies to support these important individuals.