: 17597046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1288. Can J Cardiol. 2007 Jun;23(8):657-61.The dilemma of a left ventricular assist device explantation: a decisionanalysis.Delgado DH(1), Ross HJ, Rao V.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology and Transplantation, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto,Canada. diego.delgado@uhn.on.caBACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are an important adjunct tothe management of end-stage heart failure patients. Uncertainty remains regardingwhether to remove an LVAD in a clinically stable, asymptomatic patient whodisplays signs of ventricular recovery.OBJECTIVES: To evaluate, from a patient's perspective, the quality-adjusted life expectancy of an LVAD explantation.METHODS: A Markov state transition model was used to assess the benefits of twostrategies: remove an LVAD or continue the LVAD support. Effectiveness wasmeasured in quality-adjusted life months. Utility and probability scores werederived from the literature and expert opinion. The base case focused on a35-year-old man with dilated cardiomyopathy, an implantable LVAD and signs ofventricular recovery, with New York Heart Association class I heart failuresymptoms.RESULTS: In the base case, continuing LVAD support was strongly preferred andimproved quality-adjusted life expectancy by nine quality-adjusted life months.In sensitivity analyses for the utility post-transplant, removal of the devicewould have been preferred if the utility was less than 0.7. The model was alsosensitive to the probability of late complications post-LVAD implantation. As theprobability of complications increased (greater than 28%), the preferred strategywas to remove the LVAD.CONCLUSIONS: Continuing LVAD support in asymptomatic patients with signs ofventricular recovery appears to be the preferred strategy for conveying greaterquality-adjusted life months compared with LVAD explantation. As the probability of complications after LVAD implantation increases, the preferred strategy is to remove the LVAD.PMCID: PMC2651946