: 19696055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1061. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2009 Oct;23(5):738-48. doi:10.1053/j.jvca.2009.06.009. Epub 2009 Aug 15.Recent progress in heart failure treatment and heart transplantation.Augoustides JG(1), Riha H.Author information: (1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, University of PennsylvaniaSchool of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. yiandoc@hotmail.comThere has been significant progress in heart failure treatment; its stages aredefined as a management platform for cardiovascular specialists. Surgicalventricular restoration adds no outcome advantage in ischemic heart failure over coronary artery bypass surgery alone. Novel medical therapies may includecytokine blockade and the vasodilator, relaxin. Although diastolic failure isprevalent, its clinical significance is unclear. Cardiac resynchronizationreduces mortality and hospitalization. Perioperative enoximone facilitatesbeta-blockade for prophylaxis against myocardial ischemia. Heart failure stilldetermines outcome in pulmonary embolism and cardiac surgery. The practice ofventricular assist devices continues to progress. A profile system based onurgency of mechanical support will guide future outcome assessment. Clinicalscoring systems will guide the management of right heart failure. Device flowdetermines the risk of cerebral hyperperfusion and neurologic dysfunction.Regardless of device type, renal dysfunction remains an important outcomedeterminant. Postoperative heparinization is increasingly challenged because ofthe risks of bleeding and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. The practice of hearttransplantation continues to mature. The bicaval rather than the biatrialtechnique improves short-term outcome. Oral sildenafil is effective for pulmonaryhypertension and right ventricular support. Although immunosuppression withtacrolimus is beneficial, sirolimus is less nephrotoxic and preserves coronaryvasomotor function. The induction of immunosuppression may be modified as it has a weak evidence base. Psychosocial factors also continue to influence clinicaloutcome significantly. The future of heart failure treatment is bright with signsof active growth and progress in this vibrant subspecialty.