: 21106504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]882. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2011 May-Jun;26(3):231-8. doi: 10.1097/JCN.0b013e3181f29a2e.Implementation of a comprehensive interdisciplinary care coordination of infants and young children on Berlin Heart ventricular assist devices.Staveski SL(1), Avery S, Rosenthal DN, Roth SJ, Wright GE.Author information: (1)Lucile Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford, Palo Alto, California, USA.sstaveski@lpch.orgBACKGROUND: Young children supported on a ventricular assist device (VAD) canhave prolonged hospitalizations awaiting heart transplantation. The adult VADliterature demonstrates that comprehensive programs optimize transplantationoutcomes. The goal of this intervention was to create an interdisciplinaryprogram to optimize care coordination and delivery in young children requiring a VAD.METHOD: This study was a case review.RESULTS: We have supported 8 infants and young children with Berlin Heart VAD.These children's hospitalizations have been more complex than those of our older VAD patients, and they have required intensive care for prolonged periods. Aninterdisciplinary group evaluated our practices and identified areas forpotential improvement. The focus group from our intensive care unit introducedmultiple interventions to optimize interdisciplinary care coordination andconsistency of practice. These included (1) interdisciplinary care guidelines forchronically, critically ill patients; (2) institution of a primary cardiovascularintensive care unit (CVICU) physician and nurse practitioner system; (3)introduction of a psychological intervention for families to minimize the impact of their extended CVICU stay; (4) implementation of early jejunal feeds; (5) afocused developmental and rehabilitation protocol, 6) implementation of astructured approach to minimizing blood transfusions; (7) increased structure forour interdisciplinary rounds to optimize team communication; (8) comprehensivenursing education including wound care, anticoagulation management, andlaboratory draws; and (9) a protocol for off-unit rehabilitative/developmentalinterventions. These changes in both practice and approach for young VAD patientshave also been of benefit to other chronically, critically ill children in theCVICU, as well as to our CVICU team.CONCLUSION: Comprehensive interdisciplinary care coordination and standardizedpractice can be achieved in the critical care setting for complex pediatric heartfailure patients who require long-term VAD support.