: 17144980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1340. Health Technol Assess. 2006 Nov;10(48):1-119, iii-iv.Evaluation of the ventricular assist device programme in the UK.Sharples L(1), Buxton M, Caine N, Cafferty F, Demiris N, Dyer M, Freeman C.Author information: (1)MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge, UK.OBJECTIVES: To summarise the relevant clinical effectiveness andcost-effectiveness literature, to collect data on survival, transplantationrates, health-related quality of life (HRQoL) and resource use for ventricularassist device (VAD) and non-VAD transplant candidates in the UK, and to constructcost-effectiveness and cost-utility models of VADs in a UK context. Also toinvestigate the factors that drive costs and survival.DESIGN: A comprehensive systematic review was carried out. Data were collectedfrom April 2002 to December 2004, with follow-up to March 2005.Cost-effectiveness and cost-utility models of VAD devices were developed based onUK activity and outcomes collected from April 2002 to March 2005.SETTING: National Specialist Commissioning Advisory Group funded VAD implantationwas carried out at the Freeman, Harefield and Papworth transplant centres in the UK.PARTICIPANTS: Seventy patients were implanted with a VAD as a bridge totransplantation between April 2002 and December 2004. Non-VAD-supportedtransplant candidates (n = 250), listed at the three centres between April 2002and December 2004, were divided into an inotrope-dependent group (n = 71) and anon-inotrope-dependent group (n = 179). Although patients in theinotrope-dependent group were closest to the VAD group they were less sick. Thelast group comprised a hypothetical worst case scenario, which assumed that allVAD patients would die in the intensive care unit (ICU) within 1 month withoutVAD technology.INTERVENTIONS: Patients were included who were implanted with a VAD designed for circulatory support for more than 30 days, with intention to bridge totransplantation. A multistate model of VAD and transplant activity wasconstructed; this was populated by data from the UK.MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Survival from VAD implant or from transplant listing fornon-VAD patients to 31 March 2005. Serious adverse events and quality of lifemeasures were used. Cognitive functioning was also assessed. Utility weights werederived from EuroQoL responses to estimate quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs).Incremental cost-effectiveness ratios (ICERs) were defined as the additional costof VADs divided by additional QALYs. Time-horizons were 3 years, 10 years and thelifetime of the patients.RESULTS: Of 70 VAD patients, 30 (43%) died pretransplant, 31 (44%) underwenttransplantation, and four (6%) recovered and had the VAD removed. Five patients(7%) were still supported for median of 279 days at the end of March 2005.Successful bridge-to-transplantation/recovery rates were consistent withpublished rates. Survival from VAD implantation was 74% at 30 days and 52% at 12 months. There were 320 non-fatal adverse events in 62 patients during 300 months of VAD support, mostly in the first month after implantation. Commonly observedevents were bleeding, infection and respiratory dysfunction. Twenty-nine (41%)patients were discharged from hospital with a VAD. The 1-year survivalpost-transplantation was 84%. For the inotrope-dependent andnon-inotrope-dependent transplant candidates, death rates while listed were 10%and 8% and the median waiting times were 16 and 87 days, respectively. Fortransplant recipients, 1-year survival was 85% and 84%, respectively. Both VADand non-VAD patients demonstrated similar significant improvements in their NewYork Heart Association class after transplantation. All patients had poor EQ-5Dpretransplantation; after transplantation the groups had similar EQ-5D of 0.76irrespective of time after surgery. HRQoL was poor in the first month for VADpatients but better for those who waited longer in all groups. VAD patientsreported more problems with sleep and rest and with ambulation in the firstmonth. Symptom scores were similar in all groups pretransplant. Aftertransplantation all groups showed a marked and similar improvement in physicaland psychosocial function. Mean VAD implant cost, including device, was pound63,830, with costs of VAD support for survivors of pound 21,696 in month 1 andpound 11,312 in month 2. Main cost drivers were device itself, staffing, ICUstay, hospital stay and events such as bleeding, stroke and infection. For thebase case, extrapolating over the lifetime of the patients the mean cost for aVAD patient was pound 173,841, with mean survival of 5.63 years and mean QALYs of3.27. Corresponding costs for inotrope-dependent patients were pound 130,905,with mean survival 8.62 years and mean QALYs 4.99. Since inotrope-dependentpatients had lower costs and higher QALYs than VAD patients, this group is saidto be dominant. Non-inotrope-dependent transplant candidates had similar survivalrates to those on inotropes but lower costs, also dominant. Compared with theworst case scenario the mean lifetime ICER for VADs was pound 49,384 per QALY. Ina range of sensitivity analyses this ranged from pound 35,121 if the device cost was zero to pound 49,384. Since neither inotrope-dependent transplant candidates nor the worst case scenario were considered fair controls the assumption wasinvestigated that, without VAD technology, there would be a mixture of thesesituations. For mixtures considered the ICER for VADs ranged from pound 79,212per QALY to the non-VAD group being both cheaper and more effective.CONCLUSIONS: There are insufficient data from either published studies or thecurrent study to construct a fair comparison group for VADs. Overall survival of 52% is an excellent clinical achievement for those young patients with rapidlyfailing hearts. However, if the worst case scenario were plausible, and one couldreliably extrapolate results to the lifetime of the patients, VADs would not becost-effective at traditional thresholds. Further randomised controlled trialsare required, using current second generation devices or subsequent devices andconducted in the UK.