: 17430478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1309. ASAIO J. 2007 Mar-Apr;53(2):241-5.Outcome for pediatric cardiac transplantation with and without bridge methods.Chi NH(1), Huang SC, Chen YS, Yu HY, Chou NK, Hsu RB, Chiu IS, Ko WJ, Chu SH,Chang CI, Wang JK, Wu MH, Wang SS, Lin FY.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital and College ofMedicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.Heart transplantation is indicated for children with end-stage heart failure orcomplex inoperable congenital defects. Due to the shortage of pediatric donorhearts, various bridge techniques have been used for pediatric recipients toprolong patient survival until a heart is available. This study evaluateslong-term outcome of bridge and nonbridge support for pediatric hearttransplantation. Between March 1995 and June 2004, 18 pediatric patientsunderwent heart transplantation. Six patients (33.3%) underwent biological ormechanical bridge techniques before transplantation. Eight patients (44.4%)required perioperatively extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support.Patient data and records were retrospectively reviewed. Causes of death andlong-term outcome were analyzed. Five of eight patients in the ECMO group (62.5%)were successfully decannulated and discharged home with excellent functionalclasses. No differences in rejection rate, survival rate, and functional classexisted between the bridged and nonbridged groups. Overall 1-year and 5-yearsurvival rates were both 83.3% and all have a good functional class. Pediatricheart transplantation can be accomplished with excellent early survival despitemultiple prior cardiac operations and relatively severe illness. For the variety in small, low-body-weight pediatric patients, mechanical circulatory supportusing ECMO is suitable for managing sudden collapse while waiting for hearttransplantation, and graft dysfunction after cardiac transplantation. Themortality rate is acceptable in this very high-risk group of patients andlong-term outcome is good.