: 20798278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]923. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2011 Jan;23(1):30-4. doi: 10.1097/ANA.0b013e3181eee55e.Intracranial hemorrhage surgery on patients on mechanical circulatory support: a case series.Factora FN(1), Bustamante S, Spiotta A, Avitsian R.Author information: (1)Anesthesiology Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.BACKGROUND: Cardiac disease is the leading cause of death in the United Statesand late-stage heart failure is associated with a high level of morbidity andmortality. The ventricular assist devices and extracorporeal membrane oxygenatorsare the mainstay of mechanical circulatory support devices for the patients with extremely low cardiac output. However, they come at a price of significant riskfactors, including intracranial hemorrhage. The incidence of intracranialhemorrhage on extracorporeal membrane oxygenators and on ventricular assistdevices is 37% and 13% to 14%, respectively.METHODS/RESULTS: The cases in this series focus on the risks of ICH and thedecompressive craniotomies that were carried out on patients while they were onmechanical circulatory support. The intraoperative anesthetic management forpatients on mechanical circulatory support for the noncardiothoracicanesthesiologist is highlighted.CONCLUSIONS: The results of recent cardiothoracic surgery trials have led to anincrease of surgical management instead of medical management in the treatment ofheart failure. Although most agree with the immediate reversal of anticoagulationand antiplatelet therapy, there is no standard protocol for restartinganticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy after craniotomy in this population. The standard practices of resuscitation and ACLS including inotropes, vasopressors,and vasodilators (with the exception of chest compressions that can dislodge the devices), can be used as needed. The identification of cardiothoracic surgeonsand perfusionists who are available for immediate assistance as and when requiredduring the surgery and transportation is an important factor.