
About BMC Medical Research Methodology
Aims and scope | Editorial team | Open access | Article-processing charges | Indexing services | Publication and peer review process | Editorial policies | Citing articles in BMC Medical Research Methodology | Why publish your article in BMC Medical Research Methodology?

This page includes information about the aims and scope of BMC Medical Research Methodology, editorial policies, open access and article-processing charges, the peer review process and other information. For details of how to prepare and submit a manuscript through the online submission system, please see the instructions for authors.

Scope
BMC Medical Research Methodology is an open access, peer-reviewed journal that considers articles on methodological approaches to healthcare research. Articles on the methodology of epidemiological research, clinical trials and meta-analysis/systematic review are particularly encouraged, as are empirical studies of the associations between choice of methodology and study outcomes. BMC Medical Research Methodology does not aim to publish articles describing scientific methods or techniques: these should be directed to the BMC journal covering the relevant biomedical subject area.

BMC Medical Research Methodology is part of the BMC series which publishes subject-specific journals focused on the needs of individual research communities across all areas of biology and medicine. We offer an efficient, fair and friendly peer review service, and are committed to publishing all sound science, provided that there is some advance in knowledge presented by the work.

BMC series - open, inclusive and trusted.

Editorial team
Executive EditorGiulia Mangiameli Editorial Board ManagerPaul Lambert Senior Managing EditorDiana Marshall
Open access
All articles published by BMC Medical Research Methodology are made freely and permanently accessible online immediately upon publication, without subscription charges or registration barriers. Further information about open access can be found here.

Authors of articles published in BMC Medical Research Methodology are the copyright holders of their articles and have granted to any third party, in advance and in perpetuity, the right to use, reproduce or disseminate the article, according to the BioMed Central copyright and license agreement.

For authors who are US government employees or are prevented from being copyright holders for similar reasons, BioMed Central can accommodate non-standard copyright lines. Please contact us if further information is needed.

Article-processing charges
Open access publishing is not without costs. BMC Medical Research Methodology therefore levies an article-processing charge of £1370/$2145/€1745 for each article accepted for publication. If the submitting author's institution is a Member, the cost of the article-processing charge is covered by the membership, and no further charge is payable. In the case of authors whose institutions are Supporter Members, however, a discounted article-processing charge is payable by the author. We routinely waive charges for authors from low-income countries. For other countries, article-processing charge waivers or discounts are granted on a case-by-case basis to authors with insufficient funds. Authors can request a waiver or discount during the submission process. For further details, see our article-processing charge page.

Indexing services
All articles published in BMC Medical Research Methodology are included in PubMed, the most widely used biomedical bibliographic database service, which is run by the US National Library of Medicine. Other bibliographic databases that index articles published in BMC Medical Research Methodology