: 15632819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1501. Drugs Aging. 2004;21(15):993-1012.Perioperative pharmacotherapy in patients with left ventricular assist devices.Dang NC(1), Naka Y.Author information: (1)Department of Surgery, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons,New York, New York 10032, USA. ncd8@columbia.eduHeart failure remains the leading cause of death in Western countries, affecting 4.9 million individuals and causing >300 000 deaths annually in the US alone. Thedisease is highly prevalent in the elderly population and often follows a course of progressive disability and deterioration. An estimated 15 000 patients withend-stage heart failure could benefit from heart transplant each year. Yet, as a result of a significant shortage of donor organs, only 2500 hearts are donatedannually, and approximately one-third of patients awaiting heart transplant dieeach year. Mechanical circulatory support, primarily in the form of leftventricular assist devices (LVADs), has come to the forefront of treatment forsevere congestive heart failure by providing a feasible alternative to patientswho might otherwise die awaiting heart transplant. The arrival of LVADs hasresulted in a dramatic shift in the management of heart failure, one that willundoubtedly affect and include a vast proportion of elderly patients. While LVADsrepresent a surgical approach to a disease that has traditionally been managedmedically, the pharmacological application throughout the perioperative periodremains of critical importance. Five primary classes of drugs bear specificapplication to the LVAD population: (i) drugs that provide haemodynamic support; (ii) antimicrobials; (iii) anticoagulants and antiplatelets; (iv) agents thatpromote myocardial recovery; and (v) miscellaneous other medications. Drugs that provide haemodynamic support are subdivided into inotropes, vasopressors andpulmonary vasodilators. Some combination of these medications is usuallyadministered within the perioperative period in order to maintain stable patient haemodynamics and assure proper LVAD function. Antimicrobials are of paramountimportance in the pre-, intra- and postoperative periods to minimise the risk of infection, an unfortunately common complication of LVAD therapy that can havepotentially morbid consequences. Anticoagulants and antiplatelet medications are necessary for certain types of LVADs and serve to curb the incidence of devicethrombus formation and associated embolic phenomena. Pharmacotherapeutic agentsthat facilitate myocardial recovery are being investigated as adjuncts to LVADsupport so that bridge to recovery can become a realistic outcome for a growingnumber of LVAD patients. The miscellaneous class of medications used with LVADsincludes those that minimise the risk of bleeding in select patients and thosethat enhance proper vitamin and nutrient status in the postoperative period, the attainment of which may serve vital to a successful recovery.: 15632819  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1501. drugs aging. 2004;21(15):993-1012.perioperative pharmacotherapy in patients with left ventricular assist devices.dang nc(1), naka y.author information: (1)department of surgery, columbia university college of physicians and surgeons,new york, new york 10032, usa. ncd8@columbia.eduheart failure remains the leading cause of death in western countries, affecting 4.9 million individuals and causing >300 000 deaths annually in the us alone. thedisease is highly prevalent in the elderly population and often follows a course of progressive disability and deterioration. an estimated 15 000 patients withend-stage heart failure could benefit from heart transplant each year. yet, as a result of a significant shortage of donor organs, only 2500 hearts are donatedannually, and approximately one-third of patients awaiting heart transplant dieeach year. mechanical circulatory support, primarily in the form of leftventricular assist devices (lvads), has come to the forefront of treatment forsevere congestive heart failure by providing a feasible alternative to patientswho might otherwise die awaiting heart transplant. the arrival of lvads hasresulted in a dramatic shift in the management of heart failure, one that willundoubtedly affect and include a vast proportion of elderly patients. while lvadsrepresent a surgical approach to a disease that has traditionally been managedmedically, the pharmacological application throughout the perioperative periodremains of critical importance. five primary classes of drugs bear specificapplication to the lvad population: (i) drugs that provide haemodynamic support; (ii) antimicrobials; (iii) anticoagulants and antiplatelets; (iv) agents thatpromote myocardial recovery; and (v) miscellaneous other medications. drugs that provide haemodynamic support are subdivided into inotropes, vasopressors andpulmonary vasodilators. some combination of these medications is usuallyadministered within the perioperative period in order to maintain stable patient haemodynamics and assure proper lvad function. antimicrobials are of paramountimportance in the pre-, intra- and postoperative periods to minimise the risk of infection, an unfortunately common complication of lvad therapy that can havepotentially morbid consequences. anticoagulants and antiplatelet medications are necessary for certain types of lvads and serve to curb the incidence of devicethrombus formation and associated embolic phenomena. pharmacotherapeutic agentsthat facilitate myocardial recovery are being investigated as adjuncts to lvadsupport so that bridge to recovery can become a realistic outcome for a growingnumber of lvad patients. the miscellaneous class of medications used with lvadsincludes those that minimise the risk of bleeding in select patients and thosethat enhance proper vitamin and nutrient status in the postoperative period, the attainment of which may serve vital to a successful recovery.