: 11077226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1782. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000 Jul;12(3):251-8.Future directions of cardiac assistance.Frazier OH(1).Author information: (1)Cardiopulmonary Transplant Service, Cullen Cardiovascular ResearchLaboratories, Texas Heart Institute, Houston 77225-0345, USA.During the past decade, mechanical circulatory support has gained increasedacceptance as a treatment for patients with severe heart failure who areunresponsive to conventional treatment. Steady progress has been made withrespect to technology, patient selection, and postoperative management.Currently, a wide array of circulatory assist pumps offers various levels ofassistance and degrees of postoperative mobility. These devices not only savelives (lowering the mortality of heart transplant candidates by 55\%) but, in somelong-term bridge-to-transplant cases, permit hospital discharge and cardiacrehabilitation. More than 4000 patients have been supported by long-term assistpumps worldwide. In addition to being used for bridging to transplantation orbridging to the use of some other bridging device, long-term circulatory assistdevices are being evaluated as bridges to recovery or alternatives totransplantation in selected patients with severe heart failure. Moreover, severaltotal artificial hearts have shown considerable potential in calves and will soonundergo clinical trials aimed at permanent heart replacement. Eventually, ascardiac support or replacement devices become smaller, more durable, and lessobtrusive, they may become as conventional and commonplace as pacemakers aretoday.: 11077226  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1782. semin thorac cardiovasc surg. 2000 jul;12(3):251-8.future directions of cardiac assistance.frazier oh(1).author information: (1)cardiopulmonary transplant service, cullen cardiovascular researchlaboratories, texas heart institute, houston 77225-0345, usa.during the past decade, mechanical circulatory support has gained increasedacceptance as a treatment for patients with severe heart failure who areunresponsive to conventional treatment. steady progress has been made withrespect to technology, patient selection, and postoperative management.currently, a wide array of circulatory assist pumps offers various levels ofassistance and degrees of postoperative mobility. these devices not only savelives (lowering the mortality of heart transplant candidates by 55\%) but, in somelong-term bridge-to-transplant cases, permit hospital discharge and cardiacrehabilitation. more than 4000 patients have been supported by long-term assistpumps worldwide. in addition to being used for bridging to transplantation orbridging to the use of some other bridging device, long-term circulatory assistdevices are being evaluated as bridges to recovery or alternatives totransplantation in selected patients with severe heart failure. moreover, severaltotal artificial hearts have shown considerable potential in calves and will soonundergo clinical trials aimed at permanent heart replacement. eventually, ascardiac support or replacement devices become smaller, more durable, and lessobtrusive, they may become as conventional and commonplace as pacemakers aretoday.