: 23013548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]561. Future Cardiol. 2012 Sep;8(5):753-63.Mechanical bridging to orthotopic heart transplantation in children.Pincott ES(1), Burch M.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, WCIN 3JH, UK.This article discusses the main methods currently used in clinical practice tosupport patients with end-stage heart failure and the research into new devicesunder development, particularly for young children. With an increasing demand on the supply of organs available for heart transplant, alternative strategies arebeing sought to maintain patients with end-stage cardiac failure for longerperiods of time. Devices that support a failing heart, allowing cardiac recovery in some cases, or more commonly accommodate the time to source a suitable donorheart for transplantation, provide crucial therapeutic options. Extra-corporealmembrane oxygenation and ventricular assist devices are the mainstay of suchbridging therapy. Although providing essential support to critically illpatients, they are not without their own significant associated risks.Therapeutic advances aim to reduce the risks associated with these bridgingsystems, and new artificial devices are being developed to improve thissupportive care.: 23013548  [pubmed - indexed for medline]561. future cardiol. 2012 sep;8(5):753-63.mechanical bridging to orthotopic heart transplantation in children.pincott es(1), burch m.author information: (1)department of cardiology, great ormond street hospital, london, wcin 3jh, uk.this article discusses the main methods currently used in clinical practice tosupport patients with end-stage heart failure and the research into new devicesunder development, particularly for young children. with an increasing demand on the supply of organs available for heart transplant, alternative strategies arebeing sought to maintain patients with end-stage cardiac failure for longerperiods of time. devices that support a failing heart, allowing cardiac recovery in some cases, or more commonly accommodate the time to source a suitable donorheart for transplantation, provide crucial therapeutic options. extra-corporealmembrane oxygenation and ventricular assist devices are the mainstay of suchbridging therapy. although providing essential support to critically illpatients, they are not without their own significant associated risks.therapeutic advances aim to reduce the risks associated with these bridgingsystems, and new artificial devices are being developed to improve thissupportive care.