: 16721211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1390. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2006 Jun;7(6):443-7.Treatment of refractory heart failure with a percutaneous circulatory supportdevice.Mammana C(1), Tespili M, Costalunga A, Jacovoni A, Veritti U, Lorini L, Ferrazzi P, Gavazzi A.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Department, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy. cmammana@ospedaliriuniti.bergamo.itComment in    J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2006 Jun;7(6):448.End-stage heart failure refractory to medical therapy is a clinical challenge.Heart transplantation is considered the best strategy, but it remains burdenedwith substantial limitations due to the scanty availability of facilities with a transplant programme, donor shortage, and unpredictable waiting lists.Alternatively, assist devices may allow an improvement of the haemodynamicconditions, modifying the history of end-stage heart failure and introducing new management strategies. The goal of a minimally invasive short-term circulatorysupport device in the treatment of end-stage heart failure patients awaitingheart transplant is to restore the haemodynamic conditions and to improveend-organ dysfunction, with a low incidence of major adverse cardiac events. Thisreport describes the first implantation in Italy of a new percutaneouscirculatory support device, the Cancion cardiac recovery system, in a patientwith severe end-stage heart failure listed for transplantation.: 16721211  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1390. j cardiovasc med (hagerstown). 2006 jun;7(6):443-7.treatment of refractory heart failure with a percutaneous circulatory supportdevice.mammana c(1), tespili m, costalunga a, jacovoni a, veritti u, lorini l, ferrazzi p, gavazzi a.author information: (1)division of cardiology, cardiovascular department, ospedali riuniti, bergamo, italy. cmammana@ospedaliriuniti.bergamo.itcomment in    j cardiovasc med (hagerstown). 2006 jun;7(6):448.end-stage heart failure refractory to medical therapy is a clinical challenge.heart transplantation is considered the best strategy, but it remains burdenedwith substantial limitations due to the scanty availability of facilities with a transplant programme, donor shortage, and unpredictable waiting lists.alternatively, assist devices may allow an improvement of the haemodynamicconditions, modifying the history of end-stage heart failure and introducing new management strategies. the goal of a minimally invasive short-term circulatorysupport device in the treatment of end-stage heart failure patients awaitingheart transplant is to restore the haemodynamic conditions and to improveend-organ dysfunction, with a low incidence of major adverse cardiac events. thisreport describes the first implantation in italy of a new percutaneouscirculatory support device, the cancion cardiac recovery system, in a patientwith severe end-stage heart failure listed for transplantation.