: 12365281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1668. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002 Sep;74(3):746-51; discussion 751-2.Ambulatory intraaortic balloon pump use as bridge to heart transplant.Cochran RP(1), Starkey TD, Panos AL, Kunzelman KS.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Wisconsin, Madison53792-3236, USA. cochran@surgery.wisc.eduBACKGROUND: This study evaluates a modification of an ambulatory intraaorticballoon pump (IABP) technique used in patients with heart failure of ischemicorigin for bridge to transplant.METHODS: In this retrospective review we evaluated the ability to place theambulatory IABP, any complications, time on device, and success in bridging totransplant on the ambulatory IABP device. In addition, the cost as compared tocurrent ventricular assist devices was determined.RESULTS: Between July 2000 and November 2001, 4 patients have been managed withambulatory IABP in our combined University of Wisconsin and William S. Middleton Veterans Administration programs. All 4 patients had ischemia as their mode ofheart failure, and each had a relative contraindication to standard ventricularassist device use. All 4 patients had ambulatory IABPs successfully placedthrough the left axillary artery without complication, and were able to ambulate early after ambulatory IABP placement, and increased their rehabilitation status before transplantation. Ambulatory IABP support ranged from 12 to 70 days. All 4 patients have been successfully transplanted and discharged from the hospital.Use of the ambulatory IABP support, even with multiple replacements, translatedto 10- to 50-fold savings for each of the reported patients versus standardventricular assist device use.CONCLUSIONS: As a result of our initial experience, we believe that ambulatoryIABP is an excellent mode of support in selected patients, and is cost-effective,as compared to conventional ventricular assist device therapy.: 12365281  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1668. ann thorac surg. 2002 sep;74(3):746-51; discussion 751-2.ambulatory intraaortic balloon pump use as bridge to heart transplant.cochran rp(1), starkey td, panos al, kunzelman ks.author information: (1)division of cardiothoracic surgery, university of wisconsin, madison53792-3236, usa. cochran@surgery.wisc.edubackground: this study evaluates a modification of an ambulatory intraaorticballoon pump (iabp) technique used in patients with heart failure of ischemicorigin for bridge to transplant.methods: in this retrospective review we evaluated the ability to place theambulatory iabp, any complications, time on device, and success in bridging totransplant on the ambulatory iabp device. in addition, the cost as compared tocurrent ventricular assist devices was determined.results: between july 2000 and november 2001, 4 patients have been managed withambulatory iabp in our combined university of wisconsin and william s. middleton veterans administration programs. all 4 patients had ischemia as their mode ofheart failure, and each had a relative contraindication to standard ventricularassist device use. all 4 patients had ambulatory iabps successfully placedthrough the left axillary artery without complication, and were able to ambulate early after ambulatory iabp placement, and increased their rehabilitation status before transplantation. ambulatory iabp support ranged from 12 to 70 days. all 4 patients have been successfully transplanted and discharged from the hospital.use of the ambulatory iabp support, even with multiple replacements, translatedto 10- to 50-fold savings for each of the reported patients versus standardventricular assist device use.conclusions: as a result of our initial experience, we believe that ambulatoryiabp is an excellent mode of support in selected patients, and is cost-effective,as compared to conventional ventricular assist device therapy.