: 11008069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1796. Sports Med. 2000 Sep;30(3):171-92.Exercise following heart transplantation.Braith RW(1), Edwards DG.Author information: (1)College of Health and Human Performance, and College of Medicine (Division of Cardiology), University of Florida, Gainesville 32611, USA. rbraith@hhp.ufl.eduDuring the past 2 decades, heart transplantation has evolved from an experimentalprocedure to an accepted life-extending therapy for patients with endstage heart failure. However, with dramatic improvements in organ preservation, surgery andimmunosuppressive drug management, short term survival is no longer the pivotalissue for most heart transplant recipients (HTR). Rather, a return to functional lifestyle with good quality of life is now the desired procedural outcome. Toachieve this outcome, aggressive exercise rehabilitation is essential. HTRpresent unique exercise challenges. Preoperatively, most of these patients hadchronic debilitating cardiac illness. Many HTR have had prolongedpretransplantation hospitalisation for inotropic support or a ventricular assist device. Decrements in peak oxygen consumption (VO2peak) and relatedcardiovascular parameters regress approximately 26\% within the first 1 to 3 weeksof sustained bed rest. Consequently, extremely poor aerobic capacity and cardiac cachexia are not unusual occurrences in HTR who have required mechanical support or been confined to bed rest. Moreover, HTR must also contend with de novoexercise challenges conferred by chronic cardiac denervation and the multiplesequelae resulting from immunosuppression therapy. There is ample evidence thatboth endurance and resistance training are well tolerated in HTR. Moreover, thereis growing clinical consensus that specific endurance and resistance trainingregimens in HTR can be efficacious adjunctive therapies in the prevention ofimmunosuppression-induced adverse effects and the reversal of pathophysiological consequences associated with cardiac denervation and antecedent heart failure.For example, some HTR who remain compliant during strenuous long term endurancetraining programmes achieve peak heart rate and VO2peak values late aftertransplantation that approach age-matched norms (up to approximately 95\% ofpredicted). These benefits are not seen in HTR who do not participate instructured endurance exercise training. Rather, peak heart rate and VO2peakvalues in untrained HTR remain approximately 60 to 70\% of predicted indefinitely.However, the mechanisms responsible for improved peak heart rate, VO2peak andtotal exercise time are not completely understood and require furtherinvestigation. Recent studies have also demonstrated that resistance exercisetraining may be an effective countermeasure for corticosteroid-inducedosteoporosis and skeletal muscle myopathy. HTR who participate in specificresistance training programmes successfully restore bone mineral density (BMD) inboth the axial and appendicular skeleton to pretransplantation levels, increaselean mass to levels greater than pretransplantation, and reduce body fat. Incontrast, HTR who do not participate in resistance training lose approximately15\% BMD from the lumbar spine early in the postoperative period and experiencefurther gradual reductions in BMD and muscle mass late after transplantation.: 11008069  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1796. sports med. 2000 sep;30(3):171-92.exercise following heart transplantation.braith rw(1), edwards dg.author information: (1)college of health and human performance, and college of medicine (division of cardiology), university of florida, gainesville 32611, usa. rbraith@hhp.ufl.eduduring the past 2 decades, heart transplantation has evolved from an experimentalprocedure to an accepted life-extending therapy for patients with endstage heart failure. however, with dramatic improvements in organ preservation, surgery andimmunosuppressive drug management, short term survival is no longer the pivotalissue for most heart transplant recipients (htr). rather, a return to functional lifestyle with good quality of life is now the desired procedural outcome. toachieve this outcome, aggressive exercise rehabilitation is essential. htrpresent unique exercise challenges. preoperatively, most of these patients hadchronic debilitating cardiac illness. many htr have had prolongedpretransplantation hospitalisation for inotropic support or a ventricular assist device. decrements in peak oxygen consumption (vo2peak) and relatedcardiovascular parameters regress approximately 26\% within the first 1 to 3 weeksof sustained bed rest. consequently, extremely poor aerobic capacity and cardiac cachexia are not unusual occurrences in htr who have required mechanical support or been confined to bed rest. moreover, htr must also contend with de novoexercise challenges conferred by chronic cardiac denervation and the multiplesequelae resulting from immunosuppression therapy. there is ample evidence thatboth endurance and resistance training are well tolerated in htr. moreover, thereis growing clinical consensus that specific endurance and resistance trainingregimens in htr can be efficacious adjunctive therapies in the prevention ofimmunosuppression-induced adverse effects and the reversal of pathophysiological consequences associated with cardiac denervation and antecedent heart failure.for example, some htr who remain compliant during strenuous long term endurancetraining programmes achieve peak heart rate and vo2peak values late aftertransplantation that approach age-matched norms (up to approximately 95\% ofpredicted). these benefits are not seen in htr who do not participate instructured endurance exercise training. rather, peak heart rate and vo2peakvalues in untrained htr remain approximately 60 to 70\% of predicted indefinitely.however, the mechanisms responsible for improved peak heart rate, vo2peak andtotal exercise time are not completely understood and require furtherinvestigation. recent studies have also demonstrated that resistance exercisetraining may be an effective countermeasure for corticosteroid-inducedosteoporosis and skeletal muscle myopathy. htr who participate in specificresistance training programmes successfully restore bone mineral density (bmd) inboth the axial and appendicular skeleton to pretransplantation levels, increaselean mass to levels greater than pretransplantation, and reduce body fat. incontrast, htr who do not participate in resistance training lose approximately15\% bmd from the lumbar spine early in the postoperative period and experiencefurther gradual reductions in bmd and muscle mass late after transplantation.