: 11338261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1744. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim. 2001 Apr;48(4):176-9.[Ventricular assist support of the failing heart after surgery withextracorporeal circulation].[Article in Spanish]Rivera Gaitero J(1), Domínguez Rico E, Plaza Mardomingo A.Author information: (1)Servicio de Anestesiología y Reanimación, Hospital Universitario ClínicaPuerta de Hierro, Madrid.OBJECTIVE: To communicate our experience implanting ventricular assist devices;we report the incidence of refractory heart failure after extracorporealcirculatory support and discuss clinical course after support.PATIENTS AND METHOD: Retrospective study of 14 cases of ventricular assistancerequired when refractory heart failure developed after extracorporealcirculation. The patients were 10 males and 4 females aged between 12 and 70years. Four underwent coronary revascularization, 2 required valve replacement,and 8 received heart transplants. Two left, 2 right and 6 bilateral ventricularassist devices were implanted.RESULTS: The incidence of refractory heart failure after extracorporealmechanical circulation requiring ventricular assist devices among our patientswas 0.48\%, with left ventricular failure occurring in 21.42\%, right ventricularfailure in 42.85\% and biventricular failure in 35.71\%. The main complicationswere infection, renal insufficiency, coagulation disorder, hemorrhage withrepeated surgery. One patient received a second transplant. The device wassuccessfully withdrawn from 35.7\% of the patients. Survival upon discharge was7.1\%.CONCLUSION: Refractory heart failure after extracorporeal circulation is alife-threatening event requiring rapid response and resolution. The decision toimplant a ventricular assist device is a difficult one, requiring immediateassessment of the causes of heart failure, its reversibility and the possibility of performing a heart transplant. The study of large series of patientsexperiencing this event and implanted with ventricular assist devices wouldfacilitate decision making.: 11338261  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1744. rev esp anestesiol reanim. 2001 apr;48(4):176-9.[ventricular assist support of the failing heart after surgery withextracorporeal circulation].[article in spanish]rivera gaitero j(1), dom׭nguez rico e, plaza mardomingo a.author information: (1)servicio de anestesiolog׭a y reanimaci׳n, hospital universitario cl׭nicapuerta de hierro, madrid.objective: to communicate our experience implanting ventricular assist devices;we report the incidence of refractory heart failure after extracorporealcirculatory support and discuss clinical course after support.patients and method: retrospective study of 14 cases of ventricular assistancerequired when refractory heart failure developed after extracorporealcirculation. the patients were 10 males and 4 females aged between 12 and 70years. four underwent coronary revascularization, 2 required valve replacement,and 8 received heart transplants. two left, 2 right and 6 bilateral ventricularassist devices were implanted.results: the incidence of refractory heart failure after extracorporealmechanical circulation requiring ventricular assist devices among our patientswas 0.48\%, with left ventricular failure occurring in 21.42\%, right ventricularfailure in 42.85\% and biventricular failure in 35.71\%. the main complicationswere infection, renal insufficiency, coagulation disorder, hemorrhage withrepeated surgery. one patient received a second transplant. the device wassuccessfully withdrawn from 35.7\% of the patients. survival upon discharge was7.1\%.conclusion: refractory heart failure after extracorporeal circulation is alife-threatening event requiring rapid response and resolution. the decision toimplant a ventricular assist device is a difficult one, requiring immediateassessment of the causes of heart failure, its reversibility and the possibility of performing a heart transplant. the study of large series of patientsexperiencing this event and implanted with ventricular assist devices wouldfacilitate decision making.