: 23820287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]405. ASAIO J. 2013 Jul-Aug;59(4):355-66. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e31829f9bb3.Rotary pumps and diminished pulsatility: do we need a pulse?Soucy KG(1), Koenig SC, Giridharan GA, Sobieski MA, Slaughter MS.Author information: (1)Division of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Louisville,Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.Ventricular assist devices (VADs) have been successfully used as a bridge toheart transplant and destination therapy (DT) for congestive heart failure (HF)patients. Recently, continuous flow VAD (CVAD) has emerged as an attractiveclinical option for long-term mechanical support of HF patients, withbridge-to-transplant outcomes comparable with pulsatile flow VAD (PVAD).Continuous flow VADs are smaller, more reliable, and less complex than thefirst-generation PVAD. Despite the widespread clinical use, CVAD support has beenassociated with gastrointestinal bleeding, hemorrhagic strokes, and aortic valve insufficiency. Speculation that diminished arterial pressure pulsatilityassociated with continuous flow devices may be contributing to thesecomplications has sparked much debate over CVAD support. Studies comparingpulsatile flow and continuous flow (CF) support have presented conflictingfindings, and the relevance to CVAD as DT is uncertain due to variations indevice operation, support duration, and the criteria used to quantifypulsatility. Currently, there is interest in developing control algorithms forCVAD to increase the delivered pulsatility as a strategy to mitigate adverseevent risks associated with CVAD therapy. There may also be the added benefit of specific control strategies for managing CVAD therapy, potentially improving the rate of myocardial recovery and successful weaning of mechanical circulatorysupport.: 23820287  [pubmed - indexed for medline]405. asaio j. 2013 jul-aug;59(4):355-66. doi: 10.1097/mat.0b013e31829f9bb3.rotary pumps and diminished pulsatility: do we need a pulse?soucy kg(1), koenig sc, giridharan ga, sobieski ma, slaughter ms.author information: (1)division of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery, university of louisville,louisville, kentucky 40202, usa.ventricular assist devices (vads) have been successfully used as a bridge toheart transplant and destination therapy (dt) for congestive heart failure (hf)patients. recently, continuous flow vad (cvad) has emerged as an attractiveclinical option for long-term mechanical support of hf patients, withbridge-to-transplant outcomes comparable with pulsatile flow vad (pvad).continuous flow vads are smaller, more reliable, and less complex than thefirst-generation pvad. despite the widespread clinical use, cvad support has beenassociated with gastrointestinal bleeding, hemorrhagic strokes, and aortic valve insufficiency. speculation that diminished arterial pressure pulsatilityassociated with continuous flow devices may be contributing to thesecomplications has sparked much debate over cvad support. studies comparingpulsatile flow and continuous flow (cf) support have presented conflictingfindings, and the relevance to cvad as dt is uncertain due to variations indevice operation, support duration, and the criteria used to quantifypulsatility. currently, there is interest in developing control algorithms forcvad to increase the delivered pulsatility as a strategy to mitigate adverseevent risks associated with cvad therapy. there may also be the added benefit of specific control strategies for managing cvad therapy, potentially improving the rate of myocardial recovery and successful weaning of mechanical circulatorysupport.