: 22942362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]575. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2012 Nov;10(5):370-5. doi: 10.3171/2012.7.PEDS12161. Epub2012 Aug 31.Neurosurgical complications of left ventricular assist devices in children.Mayer RR(1), Hwang SW, Reddy GD, Morales DL, Whitehead WE, Curry DJ, Bollo RJ,Luerssen TG, Jea A.Author information: (1)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Department of Neurosurgery, TexasChildren’s Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston 77030, USA.OBJECT: Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are continuous or pulsatile flow devices that could potentially be life-saving measures for patients withend-stage heart failure. These devices have clear advantages over extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and are often used in adults. They are only recently being commonly used in the pediatric age group. As the use of LVADs becomes more mainstream in children, it is important to determine the complication profileassociated with these devices. Furthermore, with the increasing application ofLVADs in children, pediatric neurosurgeons are seeing a correlative increase inassociated neurological complications. In this study, the authors reviewed theincidence of neurological complications due to LVAD use in the pediatric agegroup and the role of neurosurgery in treatment.METHODS: The authors examined data regarding patients with LVADs from the TexasChildren\s Hospital Heart Center database (July 01, 2007, to June 30, 2011) andrecorded neurological complications requiring neurosurgical consultation. Theyidentified 2 children who underwent craniotomies during LVAD treatment.RESULTS: Intracranial hemorrhage occurred in 3 (6.5\%) of the 46 patients treated with an LVAD at the authors\ institution. Of these patients, 2 were treated with craniotomies for life-threatening intracranial hemorrhages. The 3 patients in theneurosurgical cohort presented with cerebral infarction, decreased level ofconsciousness, and/or seizure. At the last follow-up (286, 503, and 550 days), 1 patient (case 2) had no decline in neurological status, underwent a successfulheart transplant, and was discharged home; 1 patient (case 1) died of refractory cardiac failure; and 1 patient (case 3) was on an LVAD for destination therapy(that is, the LVAD is not a bridge to transplantation but rather the finaltreatment). This patient was discharged from the hospital, but he died ofoverwhelming fungemia at 286 days while on VAD support.CONCLUSIONS: Intracranial hemorrhage is a serious and feared complication of LVADtreatment. While the surgical risk is substantial due to systemic anticoagulationand significant medical comorbidities, neurosurgical evacuation of hemorrhageplays an important life-saving role that can yield successful and acceptableoutcomes.: 22942362  [pubmed - indexed for medline]575. j neurosurg pediatr. 2012 nov;10(5):370-5. doi: 10.3171/2012.7.peds12161. epub2012 aug 31.neurosurgical complications of left ventricular assist devices in children.mayer rr(1), hwang sw, reddy gd, morales dl, whitehead we, curry dj, bollo rj,luerssen tg, jea a.author information: (1)division of pediatric neurosurgery, department of neurosurgery, texaschildren’s hospital, baylor college of medicine, houston 77030, usa.object: left ventricular assist devices (lvads) are continuous or pulsatile flow devices that could potentially be life-saving measures for patients withend-stage heart failure. these devices have clear advantages over extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) and are often used in adults. they are only recently being commonly used in the pediatric age group. as the use of lvads becomes more mainstream in children, it is important to determine the complication profileassociated with these devices. furthermore, with the increasing application oflvads in children, pediatric neurosurgeons are seeing a correlative increase inassociated neurological complications. in this study, the authors reviewed theincidence of neurological complications due to lvad use in the pediatric agegroup and the role of neurosurgery in treatment.methods: the authors examined data regarding patients with lvads from the texaschildren\s hospital heart center database (july 01, 2007, to june 30, 2011) andrecorded neurological complications requiring neurosurgical consultation. theyidentified 2 children who underwent craniotomies during lvad treatment.results: intracranial hemorrhage occurred in 3 (6.5\%) of the 46 patients treated with an lvad at the authors\ institution. of these patients, 2 were treated with craniotomies for life-threatening intracranial hemorrhages. the 3 patients in theneurosurgical cohort presented with cerebral infarction, decreased level ofconsciousness, and/or seizure. at the last follow-up (286, 503, and 550 days), 1 patient (case 2) had no decline in neurological status, underwent a successfulheart transplant, and was discharged home; 1 patient (case 1) died of refractory cardiac failure; and 1 patient (case 3) was on an lvad for destination therapy(that is, the lvad is not a bridge to transplantation but rather the finaltreatment). this patient was discharged from the hospital, but he died ofoverwhelming fungemia at 286 days while on vad support.conclusions: intracranial hemorrhage is a serious and feared complication of lvadtreatment. while the surgical risk is substantial due to systemic anticoagulationand significant medical comorbidities, neurosurgical evacuation of hemorrhageplays an important life-saving role that can yield successful and acceptableoutcomes.