: 14721801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1572. Ont Health Technol Assess Ser. 2004;4(3):1-69. Epub 2004 Mar 1.Left ventricular assist devices: an evidence-based analysis.Health Quality Ontario.OBJECTIVE: The objective of this health technology policy assessment was todetermine the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of using implantableventricular assist devices in the treatment of end-stage heart failure.HEART FAILURE: Heart failure is a complex syndrome that impairs the ability ofthe heart to maintain adequate blood circulation, resulting in multiorganabnormalities and, eventually, death. In the period of 1994 to 1997, 38,702individuals in Ontario had a first hospital admission for heart failure. Despite reported improvement in survival, the five-year mortality rate for heart failure is about 50%. For patients with end-stage heart failure that does not respond to medical therapy, surgical treatment or traditional circulatory assist devices,heart transplantation (in appropriate patients) is the only treatment thatprovides significant patient benefit. HEART TRANSPLANT IN ONTARIO: With ashortage in the supply of donor hearts, patients are waiting longer for a hearttransplant and may die before a donor heart is available. From 1999 to 2003, 55to 74 people received a heart transplant in Ontario each year. Another 12 to 21people died while waiting for a suitable donor heart. Of these, 1 to 5 deathsoccurred in people under 18 years old. The rate-limiting factor in hearttransplant is the supply of donor hearts. Without an increase in available donor hearts, attempts at prolonging the life of some patients on the transplant waitlist could have a harmful effect on other patients that are being pushed down thewaiting list (knock on effect). LVAD TECHNOLOGY: Ventricular assist devices[VADs] have been developed to provide circulatory assistance to patients withend-stage heart failure. These are small pumps that usually assist the damagedleft ventricle [LVADs] and may be situated within the body (intracorporeal] oroutside the body [extracorporeal). Some of these devices were designed for use inthe right ventricle [RVAD] or both ventricles (bi-ventricular). LVADs have beenmainly used as a "bridge-to-transplant" for patients on a transplant waitinglist. As well, they have been used as a "bridge-to-recovery" in acute heartfailure, but this experience is limited. There has been an increasing interest inusing LVAD as a permanent (destination) therapy. REVIEW OF LVAD BY THE MEDICALADVISORY SECRETARIAT: The Medical Advisory Secretariat's review included adescriptive synthesis of findings from five systematic reviews and 60 reportspublished between January 2000 and December 2003. Additional information wasobtained through consultation and by searching the websites of Health Canada, theUnited Network of Organ Sharing, Organ Donation Ontario, and LVAD manufacturers.SUMMARY OF FINDINGS: SAFETY AND EFFECTIVENESS: Previous HTAs and current Level 3 evidence from prospective non-randomized controlled studies showed that whencompared to optimal medical therapy, LVAD support significantly improved thepre-transplant survival rates of heart transplant candidates waiting for asuitable donor heart (71% for LVAD and 36% for medical therapy). Pre-transplantsurvival rates reported ranged from 58% to 90% (median 74%). Improved transplant rates were also reported for people who received pre-transplant LVAD support(e.g. 67% for LVAD vs 33% for medical therapy). Reported transplant rates forLVAD patients ranged from 39% to 90% (median 71%). Patient's age greater than 60 years and pre-existing conditions of respiratory failure associated withsepticemia, ventilation, and right heart failure were independent risk factorsfor mortality after the LVAD implantation. LVAD support was shown to improve the New York Heart Association [NYHA)] functional classification and quality of life of patients waiting for heart transplant. LVAD also enabled approximately 41% -49% of patients to be discharged from hospitals and wait for a heart transplantat home. However, over 50% of the discharged patients required re-hospitalizationdue to adverse events. Post-transplant survival rates for LVAD-bridged patientswere similar to or better than the survival rates of patients bridged by medical therapy. LVAD support has been associated with serious adverse events, including infection (median 53%, range 6%-72%), bleeding (8.6%-48%, median 35%),thromboembolism (5%-37%), neurologic disorders (7%-28%), right ventricularfailure (11%-26%), organ dysfunction (5%-50%) and hemolysis (6%-20%). Bleedingtends to occur in the first few post-implant days and is rare thereafter. It isfatal in 2%-7% of patients. Infection and thromboembolism occurred throughout theduration of the implant, though their frequency tended to diminish with time.Device malfunction has been identified as one of the major complications.Fatalities directly attributable to the devices were about 1% in short-term LVAD use. However, mechanical failure was the second most frequent cause of death inpatients on prolonged LVAD support. Malfunctions were mainly associated with the external components, and often could be replaced by backed up components. LVADhas been used as a bridge-to-recovery in patients suffering from acutecardiogenic shock due to cardiomyopathy, myocarditis or cardiotomy. The survival rates were reported to be lower than in bridge-to-transplant (median 26%). Someof the bridge-to-recovery patients (14%-75%) required a heart transplant orremained on prolonged LVAD support. According to an expert in the field,experience with LVAD as a bridge-to-recovery technology has been more favourable in Germany than in North America, where it is not regarded as a major indication since evidence for its effectiveness in this setting is limited. LVAD has alsobeen explored as a destination therapy. A small, randomized, controlled trial(level 2 evidence) showed that LVAD significantly increased the 1-year survivalrate of patients with end-stage heart failure but were not eligible for a hearttransplant (51% LVAD vs 25% for medical therapy). However, improved survival was associated with adverse events 2.35 times higher than medically treated patients and a higher hospital re-admission rate. The 2-year survival rate on LVADdecreased to 23%, although it was still significantly better compared to patientson medical therapy (8%). The leading causes of deaths were sepsis (41%) anddevice failure (17%). The FDA has given conditional approval for the permanentuse of HeartMate SNAP VE LVAS in patients with end-stage heart failure who arenot eligible for heart transplantation, although the long-term effect of thisapplication is not known. In Canada, four LVAD systems have been licensed forbridge-to-transplant only. The use of LVAD support raises ethical issues because of the implications of potential explantation that could be perceived as awithdrawal of life support. POTENTIAL IMPACT ON THE TRANSPLANT WAITING LIST: Withthe shortage of donor hearts for adults, LVAD support probably would not increasethe number of patients who receive a heart transplant. If LVAD supportedcandidates are prioritized for urgent heart transplant, there will be a knock on effect as other transplant candidates without LVAD support would be pushed down, resulting in longer wait, deterioration in health status and die before asuitable donor heart becomes available. Under the current policy for allocatingdonor hearts in Ontario, patients on LVAD support would be downgraded to Status 3with a lower priority to receive a transplant. This would likely result in anexpansion of the transplant waiting list with an increasing number of patients onprolonged LVAD support, which is not consistent with the indication of LVAD useapproved by Health Canada. There is indication in the United Kingdom that LVADsupport in conjunction with an urgent transplant listing in the pediatricpopulation may decrease the number of deaths on the waiting list without aharmful knock-on effect on other transplant candidates.CONCLUSION: LVAD support as a bridge-to-transplant has been shown to improve the survival rate, functional status and quality of life of patients on the hearttransplant waiting list. However, due to the shortage of donor hearts and thecurrent heart transplant algorithm, LVAD support for transplant candidates of allage groups would likely result in an expansion of the waiting list and prolonged use of LVAD with significant budget implications but without increasing thenumber of heart transplants. Limited level 4 evidence showed that LVAD support inchildren yielded survival rates comparable to those in the adult population. The introduction of LVAD in the pediatric population would be more cost-effective andmight not have a negative effect on the transplant waiting list.PMCID: PMC3387736: 14721801  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1572. ont health technol assess ser. 2004;4(3):1-69. epub 2004 mar 1.left ventricular assist devices: an evidence-based analysis.health quality ontario.objective: the objective of this health technology policy assessment was todetermine the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of using implantableventricular assist devices in the treatment of end-stage heart failure.heart failure: heart failure is a complex syndrome that impairs the ability ofthe heart to maintain adequate blood circulation, resulting in multiorganabnormalities and, eventually, death. in the period of 1994 to 1997, 38,702individuals in ontario had a first hospital admission for heart failure. despite reported improvement in survival, the five-year mortality rate for heart failure is about 50%. for patients with end-stage heart failure that does not respond to medical therapy, surgical treatment or traditional circulatory assist devices,heart transplantation (in appropriate patients) is the only treatment thatprovides significant patient benefit. heart transplant in ontario: with ashortage in the supply of donor hearts, patients are waiting longer for a hearttransplant and may die before a donor heart is available. from 1999 to 2003, 55to 74 people received a heart transplant in ontario each year. another 12 to 21people died while waiting for a suitable donor heart. of these, 1 to 5 deathsoccurred in people under 18 years old. the rate-limiting factor in hearttransplant is the supply of donor hearts. without an increase in available donor hearts, attempts at prolonging the life of some patients on the transplant waitlist could have a harmful effect on other patients that are being pushed down thewaiting list (knock on effect). lvad technology: ventricular assist devices[vads] have been developed to provide circulatory assistance to patients withend-stage heart failure. these are small pumps that usually assist the damagedleft ventricle [lvads] and may be situated within the body (intracorporeal] oroutside the body [extracorporeal). some of these devices were designed for use inthe right ventricle [rvad] or both ventricles (bi-ventricular). lvads have beenmainly used as a "bridge-to-transplant" for patients on a transplant waitinglist. as well, they have been used as a "bridge-to-recovery" in acute heartfailure, but this experience is limited. there has been an increasing interest inusing lvad as a permanent (destination) therapy. review of lvad by the medicaladvisory secretariat: the medical advisory secretariat's review included adescriptive synthesis of findings from five systematic reviews and 60 reportspublished between january 2000 and december 2003. additional information wasobtained through consultation and by searching the websites of health canada, theunited network of organ sharing, organ donation ontario, and lvad manufacturers.summary of findings: safety and effectiveness: previous htas and current level 3 evidence from prospective non-randomized controlled studies showed that whencompared to optimal medical therapy, lvad support significantly improved thepre-transplant survival rates of heart transplant candidates waiting for asuitable donor heart (71% for lvad and 36% for medical therapy). pre-transplantsurvival rates reported ranged from 58% to 90% (median 74%). improved transplant rates were also reported for people who received pre-transplant lvad support(e.g. 67% for lvad vs 33% for medical therapy). reported transplant rates forlvad patients ranged from 39% to 90% (median 71%). patient's age greater than 60 years and pre-existing conditions of respiratory failure associated withsepticemia, ventilation, and right heart failure were independent risk factorsfor mortality after the lvad implantation. lvad support was shown to improve the new york heart association [nyha)] functional classification and quality of life of patients waiting for heart transplant. lvad also enabled approximately 41% -49% of patients to be discharged from hospitals and wait for a heart transplantat home. however, over 50% of the discharged patients required re-hospitalizationdue to adverse events. post-transplant survival rates for lvad-bridged patientswere similar to or better than the survival rates of patients bridged by medical therapy. lvad support has been associated with serious adverse events, including infection (median 53%, range 6%-72%), bleeding (8.6%-48%, median 35%),thromboembolism (5%-37%), neurologic disorders (7%-28%), right ventricularfailure (11%-26%), organ dysfunction (5%-50%) and hemolysis (6%-20%). bleedingtends to occur in the first few post-implant days and is rare thereafter. it isfatal in 2%-7% of patients. infection and thromboembolism occurred throughout theduration of the implant, though their frequency tended to diminish with time.device malfunction has been identified as one of the major complications.fatalities directly attributable to the devices were about 1% in short-term lvad use. however, mechanical failure was the second most frequent cause of death inpatients on prolonged lvad support. malfunctions were mainly associated with the external components, and often could be replaced by backed up components. lvadhas been used as a bridge-to-recovery in patients suffering from acutecardiogenic shock due to cardiomyopathy, myocarditis or cardiotomy. the survival rates were reported to be lower than in bridge-to-transplant (median 26%). someof the bridge-to-recovery patients (14%-75%) required a heart transplant orremained on prolonged lvad support. according to an expert in the field,experience with lvad as a bridge-to-recovery technology has been more favourable in germany than in north america, where it is not regarded as a major indication since evidence for its effectiveness in this setting is limited. lvad has alsobeen explored as a destination therapy. a small, randomized, controlled trial(level 2 evidence) showed that lvad significantly increased the 1-year survivalrate of patients with end-stage heart failure but were not eligible for a hearttransplant (51% lvad vs 25% for medical therapy). however, improved survival was associated with adverse events 2.35 times higher than medically treated patients and a higher hospital re-admission rate. the 2-year survival rate on lvaddecreased to 23%, although it was still significantly better compared to patientson medical therapy (8%). the leading causes of deaths were sepsis (41%) anddevice failure (17%). the fda has given conditional approval for the permanentuse of heartmate snap ve lvas in patients with end-stage heart failure who arenot eligible for heart transplantation, although the long-term effect of thisapplication is not known. in canada, four lvad systems have been licensed forbridge-to-transplant only. the use of lvad support raises ethical issues because of the implications of potential explantation that could be perceived as awithdrawal of life support. potential impact on the transplant waiting list: withthe shortage of donor hearts for adults, lvad support probably would not increasethe number of patients who receive a heart transplant. if lvad supportedcandidates are prioritized for urgent heart transplant, there will be a knock on effect as other transplant candidates without lvad support would be pushed down, resulting in longer wait, deterioration in health status and die before asuitable donor heart becomes available. under the current policy for allocatingdonor hearts in ontario, patients on lvad support would be downgraded to status 3with a lower priority to receive a transplant. this would likely result in anexpansion of the transplant waiting list with an increasing number of patients onprolonged lvad support, which is not consistent with the indication of lvad useapproved by health canada. there is indication in the united kingdom that lvadsupport in conjunction with an urgent transplant listing in the pediatricpopulation may decrease the number of deaths on the waiting list without aharmful knock-on effect on other transplant candidates.conclusion: lvad support as a bridge-to-transplant has been shown to improve the survival rate, functional status and quality of life of patients on the hearttransplant waiting list. however, due to the shortage of donor hearts and thecurrent heart transplant algorithm, lvad support for transplant candidates of allage groups would likely result in an expansion of the waiting list and prolonged use of lvad with significant budget implications but without increasing thenumber of heart transplants. limited level 4 evidence showed that lvad support inchildren yielded survival rates comparable to those in the adult population. the introduction of lvad in the pediatric population would be more cost-effective andmight not have a negative effect on the transplant waiting list.pmcid: pmc3387736