: 25873821  [PubMed - in process]13. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2015 Apr;6(2):339-41. doi:10.1177/2150135114563769.Use of HeartWare Ventricular Assist System for Systemic Ventricular Support of a Pediatric Patient After Mustard Procedure.Kenleigh D(1), Edens RE(2), Bates MJ(3), Turek JW(4).Author information: (1)University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USAdorian-kenleigh@uiowa.edu. (2)Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, Universityof Iowa Children's Hospital, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Ochsner Health System, New Orleans, LA, USA. (4)Division of PediatricCardiac Surgery, University of Iowa Children's Hospital, Iowa City, IA, USA.BACKGROUND: The HeartWare Ventricular Assist System is indicated to providemechanical circulatory support of patients with intractable heart failure as abridge to cardiac transplantation. We describe the use of this device to support the systemic right ventricle (RV) of a pediatric patient with New York HeartAssociation class IIIC congestive heart failure who had undergone Mustardprocedure for D-transposition of the great vessels as an infant.CASE REPORT: A HeartWare ventricular assist device was implanted in the leftchest of a 16-year-old female patient (body surface area 1.43 m(2)) who presentedwith edema and later deteriorated, developing acute kidney injury, dysrhythmia,and pulmonary edema.RESULTS: The patient's edema and acute kidney injury resolved after deviceplacement. She was discharged home and successfully underwent device removal withheart transplant five months later.CONCLUSION: The HeartWare device may be used for extended support as a systemicRV in a pediatric patient. It is feasible to consider using the device in thispatient population.Â© The Author(s) 2014.: 25873821  [pubmed - in process]13. world j pediatr congenit heart surg. 2015 apr;6(2):339-41. doi:10.1177/2150135114563769.use of heartware ventricular assist system for systemic ventricular support of a pediatric patient after mustard procedure.kenleigh d(1), edens re(2), bates mj(3), turek jw(4).author information: (1)university of iowa carver college of medicine, iowa city, ia, usadorian-kenleigh@uiowa.edu. (2)stead family department of pediatrics, universityof iowa children's hospital, iowa city, ia, usa. (3)department of cardiothoracic surgery, ochsner health system, new orleans, la, usa. (4)division of pediatriccardiac surgery, university of iowa children's hospital, iowa city, ia, usa.background: the heartware ventricular assist system is indicated to providemechanical circulatory support of patients with intractable heart failure as abridge to cardiac transplantation. we describe the use of this device to support the systemic right ventricle (rv) of a pediatric patient with new york heartassociation class iiic congestive heart failure who had undergone mustardprocedure for d-transposition of the great vessels as an infant.case report: a heartware ventricular assist device was implanted in the leftchest of a 16-year-old female patient (body surface area 1.43 m(2)) who presentedwith edema and later deteriorated, developing acute kidney injury, dysrhythmia,and pulmonary edema.results: the patient's edema and acute kidney injury resolved after deviceplacement. she was discharged home and successfully underwent device removal withheart transplant five months later.conclusion: the heartware device may be used for extended support as a systemicrv in a pediatric patient. it is feasible to consider using the device in thispatient population.â© the author(s) 2014.