: 24270395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]321. ASAIO J. 2014 Jan-Feb;60(1):127-8. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0000000000000020.Peritoneal dialysis after left ventricular assist device placement.Guglielmi AA(1), Guglielmi KE, Bhat G, Siemeck R, Tatooles AJ.Author information: (1)From the Center for Heart Transplant and Assist Devices, Advocate ChristMedical Center, Oak Lawn, Illinois.Patients with refractory congestive heart failure may be considered forimplantation of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD). Renal failure after LVADplacement can occur to varying degrees from cardiorenal syndrome (CRS) or due to intrinsic renal disease. Patients with severely impaired renal function afterLVAD may require renal replacement therapy (RRT) as a temporary or permanentmeans of support. We present a unique case of a patient who initiated peritoneal dialysis (PD) 1 year after placement of an LVAD for destination therapy (DT). Oneyear later, PD continues to be successfully utilized by this patient for RRT.There are several proven and theoretical benefits to PD in LVAD patients.Peritoneal dialysis can provide sustained daily ultrafiltration offering greater hemodynamic stability, preservation of residual renal function, and a lower risk of systemic infection. Conversely, limitations to PD include nutritional risksdue to peritoneal albumin losses, hyperglycemia, and potential limitations tosuccessful catheter placement. Considering our patient's successful outcome andthe potential benefits associated with PD, despite the limitations, we concludethat PD should strongly be considered in patients with LVADs that require RRT.: 24270395  [pubmed - indexed for medline]321. asaio j. 2014 jan-feb;60(1):127-8. doi: 10.1097/mat.0000000000000020.peritoneal dialysis after left ventricular assist device placement.guglielmi aa(1), guglielmi ke, bhat g, siemeck r, tatooles aj.author information: (1)from the center for heart transplant and assist devices, advocate christmedical center, oak lawn, illinois.patients with refractory congestive heart failure may be considered forimplantation of a left ventricular assist device (lvad). renal failure after lvadplacement can occur to varying degrees from cardiorenal syndrome (crs) or due to intrinsic renal disease. patients with severely impaired renal function afterlvad may require renal replacement therapy (rrt) as a temporary or permanentmeans of support. we present a unique case of a patient who initiated peritoneal dialysis (pd) 1 year after placement of an lvad for destination therapy (dt). oneyear later, pd continues to be successfully utilized by this patient for rrt.there are several proven and theoretical benefits to pd in lvad patients.peritoneal dialysis can provide sustained daily ultrafiltration offering greater hemodynamic stability, preservation of residual renal function, and a lower risk of systemic infection. conversely, limitations to pd include nutritional risksdue to peritoneal albumin losses, hyperglycemia, and potential limitations tosuccessful catheter placement. considering our patient's successful outcome andthe potential benefits associated with pd, despite the limitations, we concludethat pd should strongly be considered in patients with lvads that require rrt.