: 19962044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1017. Cardiol J. 2009;16(6):493-9.Cardiac transplantation is still the method of choice in the treatment ofpatients with severe heart failure.Korewicki J(1).Author information: (1)Institute of Cardiology, Warszawa, Poland. jkorewicki@ikard.plA significant progress in the treatment of heart failure occurred during the last20 years. These advances were associated with the introduction and subsequentwidespread use of angiotensin- -converting enzyme inhibitors and beta blockers,but also with progress in device therapy and cardiac surgery. Overall, prognosis in patients with severe heart failure is similar to outcomes reported inmulticenter randomized clinical trials, such as CONSENSUS, CIBIS II, MERIT-HF,and COPERNICUS. In 2003-2007, a registry of patients with severe heart failurewas established in Poland (POLKARD-HF) that included all patients initiallyconsidered candidates for heart transplantation (HTX). Mean duration of follow-upwas 601 days (range 1-1462 days). One-year mortality (defined as death orsuper-urgent HTX) was 20% and differed from data presented by Stewart (2001). In addition, patient survival in the POLKARD-HF registry depending on the New YorkHeart Association (NYHA) class changed significantly in comparison to outcomesreported in the late 1980s. However, one-year mortality among NYHA class IVpatients is still high and exceeds 50%. As reported in the POLKARD-HF registry,one- -year risk of death among patient who underwent elective HTX was about 20%, and 3-year risk was about 22%, significantly different from the risk of deathamong medically treated patients with heart failure. These results are similar toother European data and warrant reconsideration of appropriatness of HTX inelective patients (UNOS 2 status). Undoubtedly, NYHA class IV patients arecandidates for HTX and should remain under specialist care in cardiactransplantation centers, and HTX should be performed in this group whenindications for this procedure become urgent (UNOS 1 and 1a status). Aspecialized system of care for patients with severe heart failure should becreated in Poland, particularly for patients referred for HTX. There is also anurgent need to introduce modern systems of mechanical cardiac support (leftventricular assist devices, LVAD) that would allow precise determination ofindications and contraindications to HTX and create opportunities for long-termtreatment.