
Skip to Content
American Heart Association Learn and Live

LOCAL INFO LANGUAGES CAREERS VOLUNTEER DONATE

Search



GETTING HEALTHY
CONDITIONS
HEALTHCARE / RESEARCH
CAREGIVER
EDUCATOR
CPR & ECC
SHOP
CAUSES
ADVOCATE
GIVING
NEWS
Arrhythmia
Cholesterol
Congenital Defects Children & Adults
Diabetes
Heart Attack
Heart Failure
High Blood Pressure
Stroke More
Implantable Medical Devices for Heart Failure

  187
Updated:Apr 24,2015
Surgery isn't frequently used to treat heart failure. However, it's recommended when the doctor can identify a correctable problem that's causing heart failure – such as a defect or a blocked coronary artery. Today, doctors are able to correct many problems by implanting devices.

valve surgeryValve replacement

Heart failure is sometimes caused by a defective or diseased heart valve. Heart valves regulate the flow of blood inside the heart. When they don't work properly, this puts extra strain on the heart and can lead to heart failure. Correcting the problem surgically can often improve or resolve the condition.

A variety of different replacement valves can be used: a mechanical valve made from metal and plastic, one made from human or animal tissue. During the surgery, the patient is connected to a heart-lung machine that supplies blood to the brain and body. The bad valve is removed and replaced.

After the operation and depending on the type of replacement heart valve used, patients may take medicines to prevent blood clots from forming around the new heart valve. This treatment is often long-term to ensure the new valve works properly. Most heart valve surgeries are a success, but the operation is only considered as an option when a defective or diseased valve threatens someone's life. Read more about heart valve surgery.

Defibrillator implantation
Some people who have severe heart failure or serious arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats) are candidates for implantable defibrillators. These devices are surgically placed and deliver pacing, or an electric countershock, to the heart when a life-threatening abnormal rhythm is detected.
Learn more about implantable devices

Left ventricular assist device (LVAD)
What is a left ventricular assist device (LVAD)? 
The left ventricle is the large, muscular chamber of the heart that pumps blood out to the body. A left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is a battery-operated, mechanical pump-type device that's surgically implanted. It helps maintain the pumping ability of a heart that can't effectively work on its own.

These devices are available in most heart transplant centers.
When is an LVAD used?
This device is sometimes called a "bridge to transplant," but is now used in long-term therapy. People awaiting a heart transplant often must wait a long time before a suitable heart becomes available. During this wait, the patient's already-weakened heart may deteriorate and become unable to pump enough blood to sustain life. An LVAD can help a weak heart and "buy time" for the patient or eliminate the need for a heart transplant. Most recently, LVADs are being used longer-term as ‘destination therapy’ in end-stage heart failure patients when heart transplantation is not an option. 
 
How does an LVAD work?
A common type of LVAD has a tube that pulls blood from the left ventricle into a pump. The pump then sends blood into the aorta (the large blood vessel leaving the left ventricle). This effectively helps the weakened ventricle. The pump is placed in the upper part of the abdomen. Another tube attached to the pump is brought out of the abdominal wall to the outside of the body and attached to the pump's battery and control system. LVADs are now portable and are often used for weeks to months. Patients with LVADs can be discharged from the hospital and have an acceptable quality of life while waiting for a donor heart to become available.
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (CRT)
Some people with heart failure develop abnormal heartbeats, or arrhythmias. Some arrhythmias may reduce how well the heart's lower chambers (ventricles) function. Cardiac resynchronization therapy, also known as biventricular pacing, may be needed. In this procedure, a special pacemaker is used to make the ventricles contract at the same time. Learn more about cardiac resynchronization therapy.



This content was last reviewed on 04/06/15.



Heart Failure
• Home
• About Heart Failure
• Warning Signs of Heart Failure
• Understand Your Risk of Heart Failure
• Symptoms & Diagnosis
• Prevention & Treatment
Introduction
Lifestyle Changes
Medications
Surgical Procedures
Implantable Medical Devices
Physical Changes to Report
Your Healthcare Team
For Caregivers
• Advanced Heart Failure
• Tools & Resources
Watch, Learn and Live
Interactive Cardiovascular Library
Our Interactive Cardiovascular Library has detailed animations and illustrations to help you learn about conditions, treatments and procedures related to heart disease and stroke.

Start exploring today!

Popular Articles
1 Understanding Blood Pressure Readings
2 Target Heart Rates
3 What are the Symptoms of High Blood Pressure?
4 All About Heart Rate (Pulse)
5 Low Blood Pressure
6 Heart Attack Symptoms in Women
7 What Your Cholesterol Levels Mean
8 Warning Signs of a Heart Attack
9 Good vs. Bad Cholesterol
10 Tachycardia | Fast Heart Rate



About Us
Our mission is to build healthier lives, free of cardiovascular diseases and stroke. That single purpose drives all we do. The need for our work is beyond question. More
PUTTING PATIENTS FIRST National Health Council Standards of Excellence Certification ProgramBBB Accredited CharityVeriSign Secured
Our Causes
Go Red For Women
Go Red Por Tu Corazón
My Heart My Life
Power To End Stroke

The Warning Signs

Online Communities

Heart and Stroke Encyclopedia

Volunteer
Our Sites
American Heart Association
American Stroke Association
My Life Check
Heart360
Everyday Choices
My.AmericanHeart for Professionals
Scientific Sessions
Stroke Conference
You're The Cure
Global Programs
SHOP
CEO Nancy Brown
eBooks
Contact Us
Address
7272 Greenville Ave.
Dallas, TX 75231
Customer Service
1-800-AHA-USA-1
1-800-242-8721
1-888-474-VIVE
Local Info

 RSS
Getting Healthy | Conditions | Healthcare / Research | Caregiver | Educator | CPR & ECC | Shop | Causes | Advocate | Giving | News | Volunteer | Donate
Privacy Policy | Copyright | Ethics Policy | Conflict of Interest Policy | Linking Policy | Diversity | Careers
©2015 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved. Unauthorized use prohibited.
The American Heart Association is a qualified 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization.
*Red Dress ™ DHHS, Go Red ™ AHA ; National Wear Red Day® is a registered trademark.


HON CODE CERTIFIED 12/2011
This site complies with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information: 
verify here.
