: 11465236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1736. Ital Heart J Suppl. 2001 Jun;2(6):653-8.[Left monoventricular assistance with DeBakey VAD continuous flow pump: initialclinical Italian experience].[Article in Italian]Lanfranconi M(1), Russo C, Ribera E, Colombo T, Bruschi G, Agati S, Vitali E.Author information: (1)Divisione di Cardiochirurgia A. De Gasperis, Ospedale Niguarda Ca Granda,Milano. m.lanfranconi@tiscalinet.itBACKGROUND: The shortage of heart donors causes a rise in mortality amongcandidates for cardiac transplantation and increases the waiting list.Consequently mechanical circulatory support for bridge to transplant is now astandard clinical procedure utilized in the most representative cardiac surgerycenters. Recently, continuous-axial-flow pumps have been introduced in theclinical practice and have led to new perspectives.METHODS: Four patients suffering from end-stage heart failure were implanted witha DeBakey ventricular assist device (VAD) continuous-flow pump as a bridge toheart transplant. The DeBakey VAD is smaller than the pulsatile devices commonly employed, the pump is totally implantable and is connected to a small controller and two batteries by a transcutaneous drive line.RESULTS: One patient died of multiorgan failure during assistance; 3 patientswere fully rehabilitated and were successfully transplanted after 55, 42 and 141 days respectively. In the early postoperative period the mean pump flow was 4.27 +/- 0.55 l/min, after 1 week of assistance the flow rose to 5.32 +/- 0.57 l/minand then progressively increased to 5.83 +/- 0.57 l/min.CONCLUSIONS: This experience demonstrated the possibility of continuous-flow leftventricular support with the DeBakey VAD for mid-term mechanical ventricularassistance. This pump presents new interesting aspects and opens new perspectivesfor the future of left ventricular mechanical assistance. Increasing experiencewill define the role of this device in the scenario of heart failure.: 11465236  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1736. ital heart j suppl. 2001 jun;2(6):653-8.[left monoventricular assistance with debakey vad continuous flow pump: initialclinical italian experience].[article in italian]lanfranconi m(1), russo c, ribera e, colombo t, bruschi g, agati s, vitali e.author information: (1)divisione di cardiochirurgia a. de gasperis, ospedale niguarda ca granda,milano. m.lanfranconi@tiscalinet.itbackground: the shortage of heart donors causes a rise in mortality amongcandidates for cardiac transplantation and increases the waiting list.consequently mechanical circulatory support for bridge to transplant is now astandard clinical procedure utilized in the most representative cardiac surgerycenters. recently, continuous-axial-flow pumps have been introduced in theclinical practice and have led to new perspectives.methods: four patients suffering from end-stage heart failure were implanted witha debakey ventricular assist device (vad) continuous-flow pump as a bridge toheart transplant. the debakey vad is smaller than the pulsatile devices commonly employed, the pump is totally implantable and is connected to a small controller and two batteries by a transcutaneous drive line.results: one patient died of multiorgan failure during assistance; 3 patientswere fully rehabilitated and were successfully transplanted after 55, 42 and 141 days respectively. in the early postoperative period the mean pump flow was 4.27 +/- 0.55 l/min, after 1 week of assistance the flow rose to 5.32 +/- 0.57 l/minand then progressively increased to 5.83 +/- 0.57 l/min.conclusions: this experience demonstrated the possibility of continuous-flow leftventricular support with the debakey vad for mid-term mechanical ventricularassistance. this pump presents new interesting aspects and opens new perspectivesfor the future of left ventricular mechanical assistance. increasing experiencewill define the role of this device in the scenario of heart failure.