: 21545946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]798. Expert Rev Med Devices. 2011 May;8(3):325-37. doi: 10.1586/erd.11.9.Quality of life for patients supported on a left ventricular assist device.Maciver J(1), Rao V, Ross HJ.Author information: (1)Heart Transplant Program, Peter Munk Cardiac Center, Toronto General Hospital,11C-1203, 585 University Ave., Toronto ON, M5G 2N2, Canada.Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) are mechanical pumps implanted intopatients at risk of dying from Stage D heart failure. These devices not onlyincrease survival time, they also significantly improve quality of life.Implantation of a LVAD improves hemodynamics and reduces congestion in both thepulmonary and peripheral vasculature. Improvements in forward blood flow areprobably responsible for the significant reduction in the severity of dyspnea andfatigue postimplant. Quality of life is a subjective evaluation and includesaspects of physical, mental and social functioning. Quality of life issignificantly improved after implantation of a LVAD, changes little over theduration of support and improves again following heart transplantation. Patients who are discharged home on support report significantly better quality of lifethan patients who remain in hospital. At home patients can resume physical,mental and social activities that were compromised preimplant. A significantdecline in functional ability while on support may be a trigger for patients toinitiate discussions regarding LVAD withdrawal. While the bulk of evidence wasgenerated during the era of pulsatile support, preliminary information suggestssimilar results can be anticipated for patients supported on continuous-flowdevices.: 21545946  [pubmed - indexed for medline]798. expert rev med devices. 2011 may;8(3):325-37. doi: 10.1586/erd.11.9.quality of life for patients supported on a left ventricular assist device.maciver j(1), rao v, ross hj.author information: (1)heart transplant program, peter munk cardiac center, toronto general hospital,11c-1203, 585 university ave., toronto on, m5g 2n2, canada.left ventricular assist devices (lvads) are mechanical pumps implanted intopatients at risk of dying from stage d heart failure. these devices not onlyincrease survival time, they also significantly improve quality of life.implantation of a lvad improves hemodynamics and reduces congestion in both thepulmonary and peripheral vasculature. improvements in forward blood flow areprobably responsible for the significant reduction in the severity of dyspnea andfatigue postimplant. quality of life is a subjective evaluation and includesaspects of physical, mental and social functioning. quality of life issignificantly improved after implantation of a lvad, changes little over theduration of support and improves again following heart transplantation. patients who are discharged home on support report significantly better quality of lifethan patients who remain in hospital. at home patients can resume physical,mental and social activities that were compromised preimplant. a significantdecline in functional ability while on support may be a trigger for patients toinitiate discussions regarding lvad withdrawal. while the bulk of evidence wasgenerated during the era of pulsatile support, preliminary information suggestssimilar results can be anticipated for patients supported on continuous-flowdevices.