Västra Götalandsregionen
Sahlgrenska Universitetssjukhuset, HTA-centrum
Health Technology Assessment
HTA-rapport 2014:66

Left Ventricular Assist Device as Permanent Support in
Patients with End-Stage Heart Failure
Karason K, Dellgren G, Isaksson E, Lidén H, Liljegren A,
Redfors B, Sjögren P, Svanberg T, Samuelsson O 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 2(22)
Left Ventricular Assist Device as Permanent Support in
Patients with End-Stage Heart Failure
[LVAD som permanent behandling vid terminal hjärtsvikt]
Running title: LVAD in heart failure
Karason K1*, Dellgren G2
, Isaksson E1
, Lidén H2
, Liljegren A3
, Redfors B4
, Sjögren P5
, Svanberg T3
,
Samuelsson O5
¹ Department of Cardiology
2 Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery
3 Medical Library
4 Department of Cardiothorasic Anaesthesia and Intensive Care
5 HTA-centre of Region Västra Götaland
all at Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden
*Corresponding author
Published February 2014
2014:66
Suggested citation: Karason K, Dellgren G, Redfors B, Isaksson E, Lidén H, Liljegren A, Sjögren P, Svanberg T,
Samuelsson O. Left Ventricular Assist Device as permanent support in patients with terminal heart failure
[LVAD som permanent behandling vid terminal hjärtsvikt]. Göteborg: Västra Götalandsregionen, Sahlgrenska
Universitetssjukhuset, HTA-centrum; 2014. Regional activity-based HTA 2014:66 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 3(22)
Table of content
Participants................................................................................................................................... 4
Summary of the Health Technology Assessment ........................................................................ 5
Swedish Summary of the Health Technology Assessment.......................................................... 7
Abbreviations............................................................................................................................... 9
The Patient Category and the Present Treatment....................................................................... 10
The New Health Technology – Left Ventricular Assisted Device............................................. 13
The Central Question at Issue .................................................................................................... 15
Review of the Quality of Evidence ............................................................................................ 16
Ethical Aspects........................................................................................................................... 20
Organisation ............................................................................................................................... 20
Economy Aspects ....................................................................................................................... 21
Unanswered Questions............................................................................................................... 22
Appendix 1 Search strategy, study selection and references
Appendix 2 Included studies – design and patient characteristics
Appendix 3 Excluded articles
Appendix 4 Outcome tables PICO 1
Appendix 5 Outcome tables PICO2
Appendix 6 Complications
Appendix 7 Summary of findings (SoF)-table
Appendix 8 Ethical analyses 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 4(22)
Participants
Participants in the HTA group
Göran Dellgren, MD, Associate professor, Consultant Cardiothoracic Surgery, Director Heart and
Lung Transplantation
Kristjan Karason, MD, Phd, Consultant Cardiology, Director Transplant Cardiology
Bengt Redfors, MD, PhD, Consultant Cardiothoracic Anesthesia and Intensive Care
Hans Lidén, MD,PhD, Consultant, Cardiothoracic Surgery
Ewa Isaksson, Nurse coordinator, Heart Failure Outpatient Clinic
All at the Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden
From the HTA centre
Ola Samuelsson, MD, Associate professor, Petteri Sjögren, DDS, PhD, and Therese Svanberg,
librarian. All at HTA centrum, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden
Ann Liljegren, librarian, Medical Library, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden
Who posed the question?
Olof Ekre, Chairman, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Anesthesia, Intensive Care and
Vascular Surgery, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden, and Göran Matejka,
Chairman, Department of Cardiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden
External reviewers
Anders Larsson, MD, Department of Neurology, Södra Älvsborg Hospital, Sweden
Karl Swedberg, Professor emeritus in Cardiology, Sahlgrenska Academy, Göteborg, Sweden
Are there any conflicts of interest for the proposer or any of the participants in the HTA
group?
No
The HTA was accomplished during the period of 2013-02-21 – 2013-12-11.
The last literature search was updated in February 2013
The Regional Health Technology Assessment Centre (HTA-centrum) of Region Västra Götaland, Sweden (VGR) has
the task to make statements on HTA reports carried out in VGR. The statement should summarise the question at
issue, results and quality of evidence regarding efficacy and risks, and economical and ethical aspects of the
particular health technology that has been assessed in the report.
Christina Bergh, Professor, MD
Head of HTA-centrum of Region Västra Götaland, Sweden
HTA quality assurance group, Region Västra Götaland, Sweden
Christina Bergh
MD, Professor
Anders Larsson
MD, PhD
Maria Skogby
RN, PhD
Thomas Franzén
Head of hospital library
Christian Rylander
MD, PhD
Annika Strandell
MD, Associate professor
Magnus Hakeberg
OD, Professor
Ola Samuelsson
MD, Associate professor
Therese Svanberg
HTA-librarian
Lennart Jivegård
MD, Senior university lecturer
Henrik Sjövall
MD, Professor
Kjell-Arne Ung
MD, Associate professor
Peter Johansson
MD, PhD
Petteri Sjögren
DDS, PhD
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 5(22)
Summary of the Health Technology Assessment
Method and patient group
Subjects with severe heart failure are most commonly treated with pharmacological therapy. In
selected cases an implantable automatic defibrillator and/or resynchronisation therapy may be of
additional benefit. However, in some patients with end-stage heart failure these therapies are
insufficient. Mechanical circulatory support (MCS) can be an alternative in these subjects. The
goal of MCS is to support the circulation until transplantation (bridge to transplantation), or until
the heart recovers (bridge to recovery), or as a permanent treatment option. The third alternative,
which is called destination therapy (DT), is a possible option for selected patients who are not
eligible for heart transplantation due to advanced age or comorbidities.
Question at issue:
Does mechanical circulatory support with left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) reduce
morbidity, improve quality of life, and prolong survival in patients with end-stage heart failure
not eligible for heart transplantation in comparison to optimal medical treatment?
Patients, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome (PICO1 and PICO2)
P = Patients with end-stage left ventricular heart failure despite optimal medical treatment
I1 = Left ventricular assist device with pulsatile flow (PF-LVAD)
C1= Optimal medical treatment (OMT)
I2 = Left ventricular assist device with continuous flow (CF-LVAD)
C2= Left ventricular assist device with pulsatile flow (PF-LVAD)
O = Survival, quality of life (QoL), functional capacity (NYHA classification, 6 minute walk test,
exercise test) and biomarkers of heart failure. Complications such as infections,
haemorrhages, thromboembolic events, neuropsychological functions
Studied risks and benefits for patients of the new health technology
The systematic literature search identified one randomised controlled trial (RCT) and one nonrandomised
controlled study that have evaluated the effects of PF-LVAD in comparison to OMT,
and one RCT and two non-randomised controlled studies that have evaluated the effects of PFLVAD
in comparison to CF-LVAD in patients with terminal heart failure.
Pulsatile flow LVAD in comparison to optimal medical management (PICO1)
Conclusions: Pulsatile LVAD as destination therapy probably increases survival (GRADE
), and may improve the functional capacity (GRADE ) in patients with terminal
left ventricular heart failure in comparison with OMT. It is uncertain whether the treatment has
any effect on quality of life (GRADE )
Continuous flow LVAD in comparison to pulsatile flow LVAD (PICO2)
Conclusions: Continuous flow LVAD as destination therapy probably increases survival in
patients with terminal left ventricular heart failure in comparison with PF-LVAD (GRADE
). While both PF and CF flow devices have been shown to improve quality of life and
functional outcome compared to baseline, there is only low quality evidence that CF may improve
quality of life more than PF (GRADE ), and it is uncertain whether the effect on
functional capacity differs between CF and PF. (GRADE ). 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 6(22)
Complications
Long-term MCS is hampered by several complications such as device malfunction, infections (20
– 60 %), bleeding (15 – 30 %), thromboembolic events (5 – 25 %) and right ventricular failure
(10 – 40 %). The rate of adverse events has steadily declined over time with improved techniques.
Ethical aspects
Introduction of a DT program raises several ethical issues. The self-esteem and self-image of the
individual patient probably vary between subjects, but may be affected in both positive and
negative ways. The patient will still be dependent on assistance from family members and/or
health care providers, and the physical integrity is affected. Without additional economic
resources there is a substantial risk that DT will reallocate current resources from the needs of
other patient categories.
Economical aspects
The present cost for the currently most used continuous flow device, the HeartMate II, is 750 000
SEK (about 82 000 €) with an additional 125 000 SEK (14 000 €) for necessary accessories. At
Sahlgrenska University hospital eight patients had a HeartMate II implanted as MCS for 12
months or longer during 2010-2012. The average cost per patient for the first year was about 1.5
million SEK (about 160 000 €).
Concluding remark:
Treatment with LVAD as DT increases survival in patients with terminal heart failure. It is costly
and hampered by several serious complications. During the last decade costs have come down
and the rate of complications have started to decline.
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 7(22)
Swedish Summary of the Health Technology Assessment
Mekaniskt vänsterkammarstöd som permanent behandling vid terminal hjärtsvikt
Metod och målgrupp:
Avancerad hjärtsvikt behandlas huvudsakligen farmakologiskt. I utvalda fall kan en automatisk
defibrillator eller så kallad resynkroneringsterapi sättas in i hjärtat. Hos en del patienter med
uttalad hjärtsvikt är dessa behandlingar emellertid inte tillräckligt effektiva. Ett alternativ är då
mekaniskt cirkulationsstöd (MCS). Målet med MCS är att ge cirkulatoriskt stöd i väntan på
hjärttransplantation (“bridge to transplantation”), eller tills hjärtfunktionen återhämtar sig (”bridge
to recovery”), eller som permanent stödjande behandling. Det sistnämnda benämns “destination
therapy” (DT), och är en möjlig behandling hos utvalda patienter som på grund av ålder eller
annan svår samtidig sjuklighet inte är kandidater för hjärt transplantation. Denna HTA-utredning
omfattar denna sistnämnda patientgrupp.
Frågeställning:
Minskar vänsterkammarstöd med mekanisk cirkulatorisk terapi, “left ventricular assist devices
(LVAD)” dödlighet och sjuklighet hos patienter med terminal hjärtsvikt, och förbättras deras
livskvalitet jämfört med optimal medicinsk behandling?
PICO
P = Patienter med svår kronisk vänsterkammarsvikt, trots optimal medicinsk behandling
I1 = Mekaniskt vänsterkammarstöd för permanent bruk med pump som ger pulsativt flöde
(PF-LVAD)
C1 = Optimal medicinsk handläggning
I2 = Mekaniskt vänsterkammarstöd för permanent bruk med pump som ger kontinuerligt
flöde (CF-LVAD)
C2 =Mekaniskt vänsterkammarstöd för permanent bruk med pump som ger pulsativt flöde
(PF-LVAD)
O = Överlevnad, livskvalitet, funktionsförmåga (NYHA, 6 MWT, arbetsprov) och andra
markörer för hjärtsvikt, samt infektioner, blödningar, tromboembolism och
neuropsykologiska funktioner
Kunskapsläge och evidensgradering:
Den systematiska litteratursökningen identifierade en randomiserad kontrollerad studie (RCT)
och en icke-randomiserad kontrollerad studie som analyserat effekten av PF-LVAD jämfört med
optimal medicinsk behandling, och en RCT och två icke-randomiserade kontrollerade studier som
analyserat effekten av PF-LVAD jämfört med CF-LVAD hos patienter med terminal hjärtsvikt.
LVAD med pulsativt flöde jämfört med optimal medicinsk behandling (PICO1)
Slutsatser: I jämförelse med optimal medicinsk behandling förlänger LVAD med pulsativt flöde,
som ”destination therapy”, överlevnaden hos patienter med terminal hjärtsvikt (GRADE ).
Behandlingen kan förbättra patienternas funktionsförmåga (GRADE ), men det är osäkert
om den har någon effekt på livskvalitet (GRADE ).
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 8(22)
LVAD med kontinuerligt flöde jämfört med LVAD med pulsativt flöde (PICO2)
Slutsatser: I jämförelse med LVAD med pulsativt flöde förlänger LVAD med kontinuerligt flöde
överlevnaden hos patienter med terminal hjärtsvikt (GRADE ). Såväl livskvalitet som
funktionsförmåga förbättras troligen av båda behandlingarna men det vetenskapliga underlaget
som stöd för att CF-LVAD och PF-LVAD skiljer sig åt i effekt är begränsat (GRADE ).
Det är även osäkert om de har olika effekt på funktionsförmågan (GRADE ).
Komplikationer
Långtidsbehandling med MCS försvåras av flera olika komplikationer som pumpdysfunktion,
infektioner (20 – 60 %), blödningar (15 – 30 %), tromboemboliska händelser (5 – 25 %)
högerkammarsvikt (10 – 40 %). Parallellt med förbättrad teknik har frekvensen av olika bieffekter
stadigt sjunkit under senare år.
Etiska aspekter:
Ett behandlingsprogram med MCS har ett antal etiska konsekvenser. Effekten på individens
självkänsla och självbild varierar sannolikt mellan olika patienter och de kan påverkas såväl
positivt som negativt. Patienten kommer inte vara helt obereoende av andra utan förblir till viss
del beroende av hjälp från familjemedlemmar och hälso- och sjukvårdspersonal. Den fysiska
integriteten påverkas. Om inte nya ekonomiska resurser tillförs hälso- och sjukvården är risken
stor att ett program med permanent MCS till patienter med terminal hjärtsvikt kommer att ta
resurser för andra patientkategorier.
Ekonomiska aspekter:
Kostnaden för den idag mest använda CF-LVAD, HeartMate II, är 750 000 SEK. Ytterligare 125
000 SEK tillkommer för nödvändiga tillbehör. På Sahlgrenska Universitetssjukhuset har åtta
patienter fått en HeartMate II inplanterad som MCS för längre än 12 månader under åren 2010-
2012. Den genomsnittliga behandlingskostnaden per patient för det första året var cirka 1,5
miljoner SEK.
Slutsatser:
Mekaniskt vänsterkammarstöd som permanent behandling kan förlänga överlevnaden hos
patienter med terminal hjärtsvikt och minska 1-årsdödligheten med cirka 30 % . Behandlingen är
förenad med hög kostnad och försvåras av flera allvarliga komplikationer. Under senare år har
kostnaderna minskat och även komplikationsfrekvensen har sjunkit.
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 9(22)
Abbreviations
ACE Angiotensin converting enzyme
BIVAD Biventricular assist device
BTT Bridge to transplantation
CF Continuous flow
CPET Cardiopulmonary exercise test
CRT Resynchronization therapy
DT
ICD
Destination therapy
Implantable cardioverter defibrillator
LVAD Left ventricular assisted device
MCS Mechanical circulatory support
NYHA New York Heart Association
OMT Optimal medical treatment
PF Pulsatile flow
QALY Quality-adjusted life years
QoL Quality of life
RCT Randomised controlled trial
RVAD Right ventricular assist device
RVF Right ventricular failure
VAD Ventricular assist device
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 10(22)
The Patient Category and the Present Treatment
Heart failure and degree of severity
Heart failure is a clinical syndrome attributable to disturbances in cardiac function. The
dysfunctions may have various underlying causes. The heart failure syndrome is multifaceted and
not readily defined. Below are three definitions that describe heart failure from different
viewpoints.
1. Acute and hemodynamic viewpoint
- a pathological state in which an abnormality of cardiac function is responsible for failure of
the heart to pump blood at a rate commensurate with the requirements of the metabolizing
tissues, or to do so only from an elevated filling pressure. (Braunwald E. 1997)
2. Chronic and neurohumoral viewpoint
- a clinical syndrome characterized by abnormalities of left ventricular function and
neurohormonal regulation, which are accompanied by effort intolerance, fluid retention and
reduced longevity. (Packer M. 1992)
3. Clinical and diagnostic viewpoint
- a clinical syndrome in which patients have the following features: symptoms typical of
heart failure and signs typical of heart failure and objective signs of a structural or functional
abnormality of the heart at rest. (European Society of Cardiology 1995)
The syndrome is characterized by inability of the heart to maintain adequate blood flow and/or
normal filling pressures during physical activity or in later stages also at rest. A number of
neurohumoral compensatory mechanisms are activated in order to maintain the circulation. Over
time they have a deleterious effect on the heart with further deterioration of cardiac function. A
vicious cycle arises. If untreated this leads to a continuous decline of cardiac function and
progressive worsening of the symptoms. Clinical symptoms consist mainly of fatigue,
breathlessness and fluid retention. This frequently leads to hospitalisation. Quality of life is
impaired and mortality is high.
During work up of a heart failure patient, it is important to evaluate the underlying cause of
cardiac failure, the degree of cardiac dysfunction and the functional capacity of the patient.
Pharmacologic treatment is aimed at reducing the deleterious effects of neurohumoral activation
and to alleviate fluid retention. In selected patients a pacemaker system may improve left
ventricular dyssynchrony and an implantable defibrillator can prevent sudden cardiac death. In
terminal heart failure, mechanical circulatory assist devices or heart transplantation can be an
alternative to palliative care.
Heart failure is a serious condition with an increased
 risk of premature death
 risk of permanent illness or damage, or reduced quality of life
 risk of disability and impaired health-related quality of life
The prevalence and incidence of heart failure
In a recently published report the prevalence of chronic heart failure in Sweden was estimated to
2 % (Zarinkoub R et al. 2013). The mean age of heart failure patients was 77 years, and more than
90 % of the patients were 60 years or older. The estimated incidence rate of chronic heart failure
was 3.8/1000. The 5-year survival rate from first diagnosis was 48 %, which is considerably
lower than in the general Swedish population matched for age and sex (95%).
In other community-based cohorts the annual survival rate in patients diagnosed with mild heart
failure (NYHA I-II) has been shown to be around 95 %, whereas the 1-year survival rate for those
diagnosed with severe heart failure (NYHA IV) has been reported to below 50 %. 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 11(22)
Present treatment of heart failure
The goal of treatment is to relieve symptoms, optimize cardiac function and increase longevity.
This can be achieved in most cases with the currently available treatment alternatives. They
include different pharmacological, electric, mechanical and surgical options. On the other hand, it
is also important to identify patients in the terminal phase of the disease, who are not suitable for
advanced treatment with devices, mechanical pumps or heart transplantation. These patients
should receive supportive and palliative care to provide relief from symptoms and other distress
associated with end-stage heart failure.
Pharmacological intervention is the cornerstone of heart failure treatment. It is well documented
that neurohumoral blockade of the sympathetic nervous system and the renin-angotensinaldosteron-system
reduce symptoms, improve cardiac function and increase survival. Four
different pharmaceutical groups are currently recommended for treatment of heart failure; beta
blockers, ACE-inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers, and mineralcorticoid receptor
antagonists. Diuretics are frequently used to control fluid retention. Other drugs that sometimes
are used are ivabradin (sinus node inhibitor), digoxin (inotropic agent), hydralazine and
isosorbiddinitrate (vasodilators), and anticoagulant agents (thromboembolic prophylaxis).
About one third of all patients with heart failure die suddenly, mainly due to a ventricular
tachyarrhythmia. The implantation of a cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) reduces mortality in
patients with moderate to severe systolic heart failure. One third of patients with heart failure has
an intraventricular conduction disturbance that can cause left ventricular dyssynchrony with less
efficient ventricular emptying and, often, mitral regurgitation. Cardiac resynchronization therapy
(CRT) can improve cardiac function in these patients, relieve symptoms, improve functional
capacity, and improve survival. Currently, patients who fulfil the criteria for CRT treatment most
often also receive an ICD.
Also surgical interventions may be indicated for specific underlying or contributing causes of
heart failure. These include revascularization in patients with ischemic heart disease, valvular
surgery in patients with valvular disease, and left ventricular reconstruction in patients with
extensive scarring and remodelling of the left ventricle after myocardial infarction. For a small
minority of heart failure patients heart transplantation may be indicated. The indication for heart
transplantation is terminal heart failure with severe symptoms, poor prognosis, and no remaining
treatment alternatives. However, due to organ shortage this treatment is only available to a limited
number of patients (approximately 50 annually in Sweden).
Contraindications to a cardiac transplant are high pulmonary vascular resistance, active infection,
widespread atherosclerotic disease, drug abuse, malignant disease, recent thromboembolism,
significant renal or liver disease, or other serious non-reversible co-morbidies. At Sahlgrenska
University Hospital 20-30 heart transplantations are performed each year including approximately
5-7 recepients from the Region Västra Götaland.
Selected patients with progressive heart failure in whom pharmacological and/or
resynchronisation therapy are insufficient can be treated with mechanical circulatory support
(MCS). The goal of MCS is to support the circulation until transplantation (bridge to
transplantation) or until the heart recovers (bridge to recovery), or to offer a permanent treatment
option, which has been called destination therapy (DT). Presently, DT is not available as a
treatment alternative in routine clinical practice in Region Västra Götaland, Sweden. In countries
such as USA and Germany the number of patients who receive MCS as DT has now exceeded
that of patients treated with heart transplantation. 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 12(22)
Numbers of patients per year who are candidates for LVAD as destination therapy
Potential candidates for DT are patients with end-stage heart failure who are not considered
suitable for heart transplantation due to advanced age and/or severe co-morbidities.
Examples of customary criteria for identification of end-stage heart failure are the following:
 Left ventricular ejection fraction ≤ 35%
 Max VO2 ≤ 14 ml/kg/min on cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET)
 6 minute walking distance ≤ 300 m
 More than one hospitalisation during 6 months
 Intolerance of ACE-inhibitors and/or beta-blockers
 Low systolic blood pressure (< 90 mmHg)
 Inotrope dependence in-hospital and difficult to wean
 Worsening renal and/or liver function
 Worsening right ventricular function.
Apart from advanced age, there are several co-morbidities that render heart failure patients
ineligible for heart transplantation, but not for treatment with destination therapy: Examples of
such co-morbidities are: BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2
, increased pulmonary vascular resistance, cancer
treatment within 5 years, and reduced pulmonary, renal and/or liver function. However, only a
small fraction of all patients with end-stage heart failure should be considered candidates for DT.
For example, it is vital that potential DT candidates are emotionally stable and able to comply
with MCS treatment. Absolute contraindications for MCS include active infection, widespread
atherosclerotic disease, terminal disease other than heart failure, dialysis, severe liver cirrhosis,
alcohol or drug abuse, and untreated psychiatric disease.
Thus, identification of potential candidates for DT is a highly selective process. It is estimated
that around 5-10 patients would fulfil the criteria for DT each year in Region Västra Götaland.
The normal pathway of patients with terminal heart failure through the health care
system
Patients who are considered candidates for heart transplantation undergo a thorough in-hospital
work-up before they are discussed at a multidisciplinary board. The board consists of
cardiologists, thoracic surgeons, thoracic anaesthesiologists, heart failure nurses and patient
coordinators. The work-up includes extensive laboratory investigations and a thorough
investigation of cardiac function with echocardiography and cardiac catheterisation. Further
functional capacity is evaluated with CPET and/or 6-minute walking test. Renal function is
assessed by glomerular filtration rate and pulmonary function is estimated by spirometry. An
odontologist evaluates the dental status.
The patients who are accepted for transplantation ofte receive MCS as bridge to transplantation.
Patients that are declined heart transplantation due to advanced age or comorbidities continue to
receive conventional heart failure treatment, often combined with supportive and/or palliative
care.
The work-up and decision process for DT is very similar to that used for heart transplantation. 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 13(22)
The New Health Technology – Left Ventricular Assisted Device
Description of left ventricular assisted device
A ventricular assist device (VAD) is a mechanical circulatory device that is used to partially, or
completely, replace the function of a failing heart. It takes blood from a ventricle of the heart and
pumps it to the circulation, and thereby secures perfusion of vital organs. A VAD can support the
left ventricle (LVAD), the right ventricle (RVAD), or both ventricles (BIVAD).
A VAD consists of a small pump, a tube that carries blood from a heart ventricle into the pump,
and another tube that carries the blood from the pump to either the pulmonary artery (RVAD) or
the aorta (LVAD). It also has a driveline that connects the pump to a power source through a
control unit. The figures illustrate a LVAD (Courtesy of Thoratec corporation).
VADs can be divided into two main categories. Firstly, pulsatile flow (PF) pumps that mimic the
natural pulsing action of the heart (first generation VADs), and secondly, continuous flow (CF)
devices that generate continuous blood flow with either a centrifugal or an axial pump (second
generation VADs). Patients treated with a VAD require life-long anticoagulation therapy in order
to prevent thrombus formation and thromboembolic complications.
The group’s understanding of left ventricular assist devices as destination therapy in
patients with terminal heart failure
The use of LVADs for DT has steadily increased, especially in countries such as Germany,
France, Belgium, Switzerland, Austria, Canada and USA. In 2010 there were 79 destinationtherapy
centres in USA certified to perform implantation of LVADs. According to the
INTERMACS registry (only including US patients) approximately 1000 patients received LVAD
as DT-therapy in 2012, and another 800 patients received LVAD as bridge-to-transplantation
(BTT).
Some patients that initially have been regarded as excellent BTT candidates will eventually not
become eligible for heart transplantation due to progression of co-morbidities or new
complications. On the other hand, some patients being identified, as DT-candidates will after
LVAD implantations improve in such a way that they become suitable for a cardiac
transplantation. 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 14(22)
In 2012 approximately 700 patients had an LVAD implanted in Germany, and only 300 heart
transplantations were performed. This means that most patients with terminal heart failure receive
a LVAD initially, and later it is decided whether they should be listed for transplantation or
remain on DT.
There is no Swedish VAD registry, but there is some information available on DT in Sweden
from a company registry (Vingmed AB, the sales representative for Thoratec and the Heart Mate
II). In total, 25 patients have received a LVAD (Heart Mate II) for DT in Sweden between 2005
and 2013 (survival range 2 - 2216 days, mean age 63 years, 22 males, 18 patients had ischemic
cardiomyopathy). Among these patients, six (24 %) died within 90 days. The remaining 19
patients have survived for a mean of 815 days (with 9 patients still alive). Six of the patients (24
%) patients eventually underwent heart transplantation, again underlining that DT patients on
LVAD may improve to such an extent that they become suitable candidates for transplantation. It
seems necessary to have a DT program in order to give all patients a chance to become
transplanted, even if the majority will remain on LVAD for the rest of their lives. Thus, DTtherapy
as an entity and definition is slowly becoming obsolete. If permanent LVAD treatment is
not available, patients with transplant precluding comorbidities that might resolve during
mechanical support will not get an opportunity for transplantation.
During the last decade, the LVAD technology has progressed to become standard therapy in
some medical centres. It is important that all centres that provide DT use best-practice guidelines
to maintain outcomes that are comparable to those of existing centres of excellence.
The ethical concerns raised by DT will require extensive information to patients and their
families, and also a detailed DT program that will meet the needs of patients and other family
members. Examples of prerequisite conditions before introducing a program with destination
therapy include:
1. Participation of a multidisciplinary care team, including palliative care specialists
2. Adopting a concise plan of care for anticipated device-related complications
3. Planning for anticipated end-of-life care and timing of device deactivation
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 15(22)
The Central Question at Issue
Does mechanical circulatory support with left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) reduce
morbidity, improve quality of life, and prolong survival in patients with end-stage heart failure
not eligible for heart transplantation, in comparison to optimal medical treatment?
PICO
P= Patients, I= Intervention, C= Comparison, O=Outcome
PICO 1
P = Patients with end-stage left ventricular heart failure despite optimal medical treatment
I = Left ventricular assist device with pulsatile flow (PF-LVAD)
heart transplant
C = Optimal medical treatment (OMT)
O = Survival, quality of life (QoL), functional capacity (NYHA classification, 6 minute walk
test, exercise test) and biomarkers of heart failure. Complications such as infections,
haemorrhages, thromboembolic events and neuropsychological functions
PICO 2
P = Patients with terminal left ventricular heart failure despite optimal medical treatment
I = Left ventricular assist device with continuous flow (CF-LVAD)
C = Left ventricular assist device with pulsatile flow (PF-LVAD)
O = Survival, quality of life, functional capacity (NYHA classification, 6 minute walk test,
exercise test) and biomarkers of heart failure.
Complications such as infections, haemorrhages, thromboembolic events and
neuropsychological functions
heart transplant
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 16(22)
Review of the Quality of Evidence
Search strategy, study selection and references – appendix 1
During February 2013 two librarians (TS, AL) performed systematic searches in
Medline, PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Library and a number of HTA-databases.
Reference lists of relevant articles were also scrutinised for additional references.
Search strategies, eligibility criteria and a graphic presentation of the selection
process are accounted for in appendix 1. The librarians conducted the literature
searches, selected studies, and independently assessed the obtained abstracts and
made a first selection of full-text articles for inclusion or exclusion. After reading
the articles in full text they made a second selection of articles. Any disagreements
were resolved in consensus. The articles that remained were sent to the other
participants in the HTA group, who read the articles independently of one another,
and then decided in a consensus meeting which articles that should be included.
The literature search identified a total of 1231 articles (after removal of duplicates).
The librarians then excluded 1095 articles after reading their abstracts. Another 136
articles were excluded by the librarians after reading the articles in full text. The
remaining 56 articles were sent to the group, and 26 of them were finally included
in the report. There were two randomised controlled trials (RCT, four publications)
and three non-randomised controlled studies (three publications). Twelve were case
series, five were systematic reviews, and two were health economy analyses. The
controlled studies have been critically appraised using modified checklists from the
Swedish Council on Health Technology Assessment regarding randomized
controlled trials and cohort studies.
The present knowledge of left ventricular assist devices as destination therapy
in patients with terminal heart failure
PICO 1 – comparison of PF-LVAD with OMT
Two HTA reports have concluded that LVAD with pulsatile flow improves survival
and quality of life. One was published in 2005 by the NIHR Coordinating Centre for
Health Technology Assessment (NCCHTA) in Southampton, UK (Clegg AJ et al.
2005), and the other in 2007 by the German Agency for HTA of German Institute of
Medical Documentation and Information (Angermayr L et al. 2007).
The systematic literature search identified one randomised controlled trial (RCT)
and one non-randomised controlled study that have studied the effects of PF-LVAD
in comparison to OMT in patients with end-stage heart failure. In the RCT 61
patients were treated with OMT and 68 patients were treated with the pulsatile
LVAD HeartMate I. The trial had no major problems concerning directness, study
limitations or precision. The non-randomised study was smaller and the two study
groups were not balanced with regard to socio-economic status. The patients in the
control group consisted of patients who did not choose, or did not have the financial
resources, to undergo LVAD implantation.
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 17(22)
Mortality (Appendix 4a)
The RCT reported a significantly (p< 0.01) higher one-year survival in the PFLVAD
group (52 %) compared to the OMT group (23 %). The two-year survival
rates were 23 %, and 8 % respectively (ns). In the non-randomised study, the
corresponding 1-year survival rates were 27 % and 11% (p>0.05).
Conclusion: Pulsatile LVAD as destination therapy probably increases survival in
comparison with OMT in patients with end-stage left ventricular heart failure.
Moderate quality of evidence (GRADE ).
Quality of life (Appendix 4b)
The RCT analysed quality of life after one year using three different questionnaires.
Due to the high mortality rate QoL-scores were only available in six OMT and 23
PF-LVAD patients. The SF-36 Emotional role and Beck Depression Inventory
scores were significantly better in the PF-LVAD group, but no difference between
the study groups was seen in Minnesota Living with heart Failure scores.
Conclusion: It is uncertain whether PF-LVAD improves the quality of life in
comparison with OMT in patients with end-stage left ventricular heart failure.
Very low quality of evidence (GRADE )
Functional capacity (Appendix 4c)
Both the RCT and the non-randomised study analysed functional capacity after oneyear
follow-up. Due to the high mortality rate only six OMT-patients and 23
LVAD-patients were tested in the RCT. Both the ability to “walk one block without
any physical limitation” and SF-36 physical function score were significantly better
in the PF-LVAD group than in the OMT group. In the non-randomised study 11 of
18 patients in the OMT and 22 of 37 patients in the PF-LVAD group were evaluated
by the NYHA classification. At the last assessment all patients in the OMT were
still in NYHA class IV, while 85 % of the patients in the PF-LVAD group had
improved to NYHA class I-II.
Conclusion: PF-LVAD may improve the functional capacity in comparison with
OMT in patients with end-stage left ventricular heart failure.
Low quality of evidence (GRADE )
PICO 2 – comparison of CF-LVAD with PF-LVAD
Two published reviews have assessed the effects of the newer continuous flow
devices (CF-LVAD) in patients with end-stage heart failure. One is a systematic
review from the Department of Veteran Affairs, US, published in 2011 (Rector TS
et al. 2012). It concludes that one single study provides moderate evidence that the
use of the HeartMate II LVAD increases patient survival, with fewer complications
and fewer hospitalizations compared to the older pulsatile flow LVAD HeartMate I.
The other review is from Quebec (INESS) published in 2012 (Sas G et al. 2012). It
concludes that CF-LVAD can be considered a clinically effective therapeutic option
compared to optimal medical treatment for appropriate patients in both BTT and DT
patients.
The systematic literature search identified one RCT and two non-randomised
controlled studies that have studied the effects of PF-LVAD in comparison to CFLVAD
in patients with end-stage heart failure. In the RCT the patients were
randomised in a 2:1 ratio. Thus, 134 patients received a continuous flow HeartMate
II and 66 patients received a pulsatile flow HeartMate I. The study had some 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 18(22)
problems with directness and precision (see Appendix 7, SoF table). The two nonrandomised
trials had major problems, as most of the pulsatile LVADs were
implanted some years before the continuous flow devices came in use. Thus, the
patient study groups with PF-LVADs must be regarded as historical controls.
Mortality (Appendix 5a)
The RCT reported a one-year survival of 68 % in the CF-LVAD group and 55 % in
the PF-LVAD group. The survival was significantly better ( p< 0.01) in the CFLVAD
group after two years with a survival rate of 58 % in comparison to 24 % in
the PF-LVAD group. Both the non-randomised studies reported significantly higher
two-year survival rates in the patients who received a CF-LVAD.
Conclusion: Continuous flow LVAD as destination therapy probably increases
survival in patients with end-stage heart failure in comparison with pulsatile flow
LVAD.
Moderate quality of evidence (GRADE ).
Quality of life (Appendix 5b)
Only the RCT analysed the quality of life. This was done after one year and two
years follow-up using two different questionnaires. However, the small numbers of
patients at the two-year follow-up did not allow any meaningful analyses. QoL
improved in both LVAD groups in comparison to baseline. According to Minnesota
Living with Heart Failure questionnaire, QoL was significantly better in the CFLVAD
group compared to the PF-LVAD group after one year, whereas the
difference in the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy questionnaire did not reach statistical
significance (p = 0.06).
Conclusion: PF-LVAD may improve the quality of life in patients with end-stage
left ventricular heart failure in comparison with PF-LVAD.
Low quality of evidence (GRADE )
Functional capacity (Appendix 5c)
Only the RCT analysed functional capacity. As for the QoL analyses, only the data
at 12-month follow-up allowed a meaningful comparison. Both study groups
experienced early, and sustained, improvement of functional capacity. However,
there was no significant difference between the two groups.
Conclusion: It is uncertain whether CF-LVAD and PF-LVAD differ in their effects
on functional capacity.
Very low quality of evidence (GRADE ).
Complications (Appendix 6)
Long-term MCS is hampered by several complications such as device malfunction,
infections, bleeding, thromboembolic events and right ventricular failure (RVF).
The rate of adverse events has steadily declined with improved techniques (second
generation LVAD vs first generation).
Infections are a significant problem. They often occur at the driveline exit site. The
reported incidence is up to 40 % per year (events/patient/year). Sepsis is also
common with reported incidence rates varying from 20 % to 60 % in different
studies. Infections that involve the pump itself are uncommon, but are serious since
long-term eradication is nearly impossible.
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 19(22)
Bleeding events are common. Perioperative bleeding occurs, in particular in patients
with previous cardiac operations and/or coagulopathy related to hepatic dysfunction.
Re-exploration due to a post-operative bleeding has been reported to be required in
15 – 30 %. Bleeding complications during long-term follow-up are also frequent, in
particular gastrointestinal bleeding, with incidence rates up to 50 %
(events/patient/year).
Patients with LVADs may also suffer thromboembolic complications. The reported
incidence of ischemic stroke varies between 5 - 25 %. Pump thrombus may occur,
and sometimes necessitates pump replacement if aggressive anticoagulation or
thrombolytic therapies are not successful.
It is essential that the right ventricular function is adequate for an LVAD to function
normally. Right ventricular failure occurs in10 - 40 % of patients who receive
LVAD as bridge-to-transplantation.. The incidence of RVF in adequately selected
patients for DT is not known. Treatment includes optimization of the right
ventricular function, management of pulmonary vasoconstriction, and in some cases
temporary support with a right ventricular assist device.
Ongoing research?
A search in the ClinicalTrials database (www.clinicaltrials.gov) July 4, 2013, using the
search terms (heart-assist device OR left ventricular assist device OR left ventricular
assist system OR ventricular assist device OR VAD OR LVAD OR LVAS) AND
(destination OR permanent OR non-transplant OR long-term OR ineligible OR "not
assist support devices
eligible" OR "not candidate" OR non-candidate) identified 33 studies with regard to
LVADs. Five studies were relevant for the present questions at issue.
Two studies will compare the CF-LVAD HeartMate II with optimal medical therapy.
Both of them are being performed in the USA. One of them is an RCT (REVIVE-IT), and
it is currently recruiting patients. The estimated completion date is December 2016. The
other study one is a non-randomised study that is ongoing. Its estimated completion date
is December 2015.
Another two RCTs are ongoing. They compare either the LVADs Jarvik 2000 with Heart
Mate II (estimated completion date December 2016), or the HeartWear LVAD with “any
other FDA approved LVAD” (estimated completion date May 2017). Both are being
performed in the USA. The former is still recruiting patients whereas the other is not.
A fifth study is ongoing in Belgium. It is a non-randomised study that will compare the
efficacy of HeartMate II with historical controls.
Which medical societies or health authorities recommend left ventricular assist devices as
destination therapy in patients with terminal heart failure?
In the European Society of Cardiology Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and
chronic heart failure 2012 DT it is recommended for highly selected patients, who have end-stage
heart failure despite optimal pharmacological and device therapy, and who are not suitable for
heart transplantation, but are expected to survive over one year with good functional status, to
improve symptoms, and reduce the risk of heart failure hospitalization and of premature death
(Eur Soc Cardiol. 2012) 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 20(22)
The 2013 ACCF/ American Heart Association Guidelines for the Management of Heart Failure
also recommended DT with durable MCS to prolong survival for carefully selected patients with
stage D heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (ACCF/AHA 2013).
In the Swedish National Guidelines for Cardiovascular Diseases from 2008 it is concluded that
DT may improve survival, functional capacity and quality of life in patients with advanced heart
failure (NYHA IIIB-IV) that receive OMT and are not eligible for heart transplantation
(Socialstyrelsen 2008). However, the ratio of cost to quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) was
considered to be very high. In these guidelines, which are those available in Sweden today, DT is
not recommended for routine use. Instead it is advocated that further results from on-going
studies should be awaited.
Ethical Aspects
See Appendix 8
Organisation
When can left ventricular assist device for destination therapy be put into practice at the
hospital?
Immediately.
Is left ventricular assist device for destination therapy used in other hospitals in Region
Västra Götaland, Sweden?
No. At the present, DT is not available for patients with end-stage heart failure in Region Västra
Götaland. In the Stockholm Region there is currently a treatment program with DT, and up until
now a total of 15-20 patients have received this treatment (Dr LH Lund, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, personal communication October 2013).
Will there be any consequences of left ventricular assist device for destination therapy for
the personnel?
Currently, mechanical circulatory support systems are frequently utilized as BTT, and the
hospital personnel are already familiar with the treatment. Introduction of DT would lead to an
increased number of patients with long-term follow-up.
Will there be any consequences for other clinics or supporting functions at the hospital or
in the whole Region Västra Götaland?
Yes. Initial, follow-up of the patients will take place at the outpatient clinic of the Department
of Cardiology Sahlgrenska Hospital. Later on follow-up visits will also be necessary at the local
hospitals. However, there will only be a few patients (less than 10) requiring follow-up during
the first years after the initiation of a DT program. 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 21(22)
Economy Aspects
Present costs of a continuous flow left ventricular assist device
The current cost for the CF-LVAD HeartMate II implant kit is 750,000 SEK
(82,000 €), and for accessories 125,000 SEK (14 000 €).
During 2010-2012, 8 patients had an implanted HeartMate II as mechanical circulatory support
for 12 months or longer. The average cost for the first year was about 1.5 million SEK
(including the cost of the implant kit and accessories) ranging between 1.4-2.7 million SEK
(153,000 – 295,000 €). The cost was related to the number of in-hospital days, especially the
number of days in the intensive care unit. The average length of hospital stay was 50.5 days
(range 29-95).
As a comparison, three patients with terminal heart failure (NYHA class III-IV) who have been
followed for more than one year with OMT were identified. The costs for these patients
between June 2011 to May 2012, i.e. one year, were 132,000 SEK (14,000 €) , 759,000 SEK
(144,000 €) and 1,909,000 SEK (208,000 €), respectively. Also in these cases the yearly
costs was directly related to the length of hospital stay (range: 17- 134 days).
In the calculations of the costs for CF-LVAD and OMT above, the costs of home care are not
included (due to different management systems).
In 2010, the average cost for heart transplantation was approximately 1.25 million SEK
(136,000 €). This includes only the surgical procedure and the postoperative hospital stay. The
costs of follow-up and later hospitalisations are not included.
Expected costs of left ventricular assist device in patients with terminal heart failure
See 9a.
Total change of cost of left ventricular assist device in patients with terminal heart failure
The cost of 10 patients treated with LVAD (see 2d) during the first year is estimated to be about
15 million SEK. Assuming that the corresponding cost for a patient treated with OMT is
750,000 SEK, the change in cost will be an increase of 7.5 million SEK.
Since patients with LVAD are expected to live longer this will add further increments in the
total costs during the following years. It is difficult to estimate this additional cost.
Can the use of left ventricular assist device in patients with terminal heart failure be
adopted and used within the present clinic budget?
No.
Are there any available analyses of health economy? Cost advantages or disadvantages?
There is no Swedish cost-effectiveness analysis.
In the German HTA report (Angermayer 2007), which was based predominately on studies of
the first generation LVADs, i.e. PF-LVADS, the conclusion was that “the incremental costs per
quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) may be between 200 000 and 600 000 € for DT”. Similar 
 HTA-report: LVAD in heart failure 22(22)
conclusions were made in a British expert review from 2008 that could identify four published
cost-effectiveness studies (Hutchinson 2008). However, they also pointed out that the
methodological quality in the majority of the studies was poor, as was their generalizability.
A Canadian HTA report published in 2012 concluded that the cost-effectiveness of Heart Mate
II was “unfavourable” regardless of the initial indication (Sas 2012). However, the conclusions
were based predominantly on experiences of HeartMate II and mostly as BTT. Since these
patients relatively soon get a transplant, the real cost benefit of the LVAD is therefore
underestimated when data are extrapolated to the DT indication.
There have been no studies that directly have compared CF-LVADS with OMT. Rogers et al.
used data from the REMATCH trial and the Heart Mate II trial to indirectly estimate the costeffectiveness
of using the CF-LVAD Heart Mate II (Rogers 2012). Compared with medical
management the CF-LVAD had higher 5-year costs ($360 407 versus $62 856) and QALYs
(1.87 vs 0.37). The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of the CF-LVAD was estimated to be
$198 184 per QALY (this corresponds to about 1.2 million SEK/QALY).
Unanswered Questions
Important gaps in scientific knowledge
There are no published RCTs that have compared the outcomes of modern CF-LVADs with OMT
with regard to survival, functional capacity, or quality of life. Such a trial would presently be of
great interest, since pharmacological treatment, resynchronization therapy, and the overall
management of heart failure have improved during the last decade (after the publication of the
RCT that initially compared PF-LVAD with OMT). It is of interest to point out that such a trial is
presently considered unethical in the USA.
Is there any interest in your own clinic/research group/organisation to start studies/trials
within the research field at issue?
Yes. We are interested in starting a prospective, randomized multicentre trial in Sweden
evaluating the HeartMate II® LVAD versus OMT in patients with severe heart failure (NYHA
IIIb-IV) that are not eligible for heart transplantation. In such a study we would aim to include
100-120 patients and randomize them to HM II or OMT in a 1:1 ratio. The primary outcome
would be a composite endpoint of survival, freedom from debilitating stroke and improved
functional capacity. Patient recruitment would be expected to take 18 months and each
included patient would be followed for 18 months.
The Departments of Cardiology and Thoracic Surgery at all Swedish University Hospitals have
shown interest in such a study and are willing to participate. A reference group with
participants from all university hospitals has been engaged to work on a study protocol. The
initial response from the LVAD industry (Thoratec) has been positive and negotiations with
respect to specific terms regarding such a study are ongoing. The project will, however, need
additional funding and applications for study grants are being prepared. 

Appendix 1, Search strategy, study selection and references –
Question(s) at issue:
Does mechanical circulatory support with left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) reduce
morbidity, improve quality of life, and prolong survival in patients with terminal heart failure,
in comparison to optimal medical treatment?
PICO: (P=Patient I=Intervention C=Comparison O=Outcome)
PICO 1
P = Patients with terminal left ventricular heart
failure despite optimal medical treatment
I = Implantation of a left ventricular assist device
with pulsatile flow (PF-LVAD)
C = Optimal medical treatment (OMT)
O = Survival, quality of life (QoL), functional
capacity (NYHA classification, 6 minute walk
test, exercise test) and biomarkers of heart
failure. Complications such as infections,
haemorrhages, thromboembolic events,
neuropsychological functions
PICO 2
P = Patients with terminal left ventricular heart
failure despite optimal medical treatment
I = Implantation of a left ventricular assist device
with continous flow (CF-LVAD)
C = Implantation of a left ventricular assist device
with pulsatile flow (PF-LVAD)
O = Survival, quality of life, functional capacity
 (NYHA classification, 6 minute walk test,
 exercise test) and biomarkers of heart failure.
 Complications such as infections,
 haemorrhages, thromboembolic events,
 neuropsychological functions
Eligibility criteria
Study design:
Randomized controlled trials
Non-randomized controlled trials
Case series if ≥ 30 patients
Systematic reviews
Language:
English, Swedish, Danish, Norwegian
Publication date:
2000- 

Selection process – flow diagram

Records identified through database
searching
(n =1852)
Screening Included Eligibility Identification
Additional records identified
through other sources
(n =76)
Records after duplicates removed
(n = 1231)
Records screened by HTAlibrarians
(n = 1231)
Records excluded by HTA-librarians. Did
not fulfil PICO or other eligibility criteria
(n = 1095)
Full-text articles assessed for
eligibility by HTA-librarians
(n = 136)
Full-text articles excluded by HTAlibrarians,
with reasons
(n = 81)
52 = wrong intervention
2 = wrong comparison
1 = wrong outcome
23 = wrong study design
3 = wrong focus
Full-text articles assessed for
eligibility by project group
(n = 55)
Full-text articles excluded by project
group, with reasons
(n = 30)
See Appendix 2
Studies included in synthesis
(n =26)
Including 4 systematic reviews
commented upon
See Appendix 1
assist support devices
Search strategies
Database: Medline & Medline in process (OVID)
Date: 2013-02-26
No of results: 786
# Searches Results
1 exp Heart Failure/ 79663
2 exp Ventricular Dysfunction, Left/ 19737
3 heart failure.ab,kw,ti. 96006
4 (left adj3 ventric$4 adj3 dysfunction$1).ab,kw,ti. 13158
5 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 142421
6 exp Heart-Assist Devices/ 7680
7 heart-assist device$1.ab,kw,ti. 106
8 left ventric$4 assist device$1.ab,kw,ti. 3102
9 left ventric$4 assist system$1.ab,kw,ti. 338
10 ventric$4 assist device$1.ab,kw,ti. 5143
11 (VAD or LVAD or LVAS).ab,kw,ti. 6602
12 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 12798
13
((destination adj3 therapy) or permanent or non-transplant$ or nontransplant$ or non transplant$ or
longterm or long-term or long term).ab,kw,ti. 553532
14 ((ineligible or "not eligible" or "not candidate$1" or non-candidate$1) adj4 transplant$).ab,kw,ti. 301
15 13 or 14 553741
16 5 and 12 and 15 1035
17 (animals not (animals and humans)).sh. 3673442
18 (comment or editorial or letter).pt. 1217538
19 16 not 17 1003
20 19 not 18 980
21 limit 20 to (yr="2000 -Current" and (danish or english or norwegian or swedish)) 786
Database: PubMed
Date: 2013-02-26
No of results: 81
Search Query Items
found
#32 Search #30 AND #31 81
#31 Search (pubmednotmedline[sb] OR in process[sb] OR publisher[sb]) 1900735
#30 Search #28 NOT #29 836
#29 Search ((animals[mh]) NOT (animals[mh] AND humans[mh])) 3757147
#28 Search #26 NOT #27 859
#27 Search (Editorial[ptyp] OR Letter[ptyp] OR Comment[ptyp]) 1219963
#26
Search #9 AND #18 AND #22 Filters: Publication date from 2000/01/01; Danish; English;
Norwegian; Swedish 882
#23 Search #9 AND #18 AND #22 1111
#22 Search #19 OR #21 562736
#21
Search (ineligible[tiab] OR "not eligible"[tiab] OR "not candidate*"[tiab] OR non-candidate*[tiab])
AND transplant*[tiab] 322

#19
Search (destination[tiab] AND therapy[tiab]) OR permanent[tiab] OR non-transplant*[tiab] OR
nontransplant*[tiab] OR non transplant*[tiab] OR longterm[tiab] OR long-term[tiab] OR long
term[tiab] 562481
#18 Search #11 OR #12 OR #13 OR #14 OR #16 OR #17 13338
#17 Search VAD[tiab] OR LVAD[tiab] OR LVAS[tiab] 6877
#16 Search ventricle* assist device*[tiab] OR ventricul* assist device*[tiab] 5736
#14 Search left ventric* assist system*[tiab] 415
#13 Search left ventric* assist device*[tiab] 3769
#12 Search heart-assist device*[tiab] 106
#11 Search "Heart-Assist Devices"[Mesh] 7669
#9 Search #2 OR #4 OR #5 OR #8 151926
#8 Search left[tiab] AND ventric*[tiab] AND dysfunction*[tiab] 25459
#5 Search heart failure[tiab] 97970
#4 Search "Ventricular Dysfunction, Left"[Mesh] 19681
#2 Search "Heart Failure"[Mesh] 79697
Database: EMBASE 1974 to 2013 February 25 (OVID SP)
Date: 2013-02-26
No of results: 860
# Searches Results
1 exp heart failure/ 264726
2 exp heart left ventricle function/ 30457
3 heart failure.ti,ab,kw. 143477
4 (left adj3 ventric$4 adj3 dysfunction$1).ti,ab,kw. 19064
5 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 317750
6 exp heart assist device/ 8672
7 heart-assist device$1.ti,ab,kw. 488
8 left ventric$4 assist device$1.ti,ab,kw. 4638
9 left ventric$4 assist system$1.ti,ab,kw. 418
10 ventric$4 assist device$1.ti,ab,kw. 7786
11 (VAD or LVAD or LVAS).ti,ab,kw. 9971
12 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 or 11 17588
13
((destination adj3 therapy) or permanent or non-transplant$ or nontransplant$ or non transplant$ or longterm
or long-term or long term).ti,ab,kw. 723616
14 ((ineligible or "not eligible" or "not candidate$1" or non-candidate$1) adj4 transplant$).ti,ab,kw. 510
15 13 or 14 723984
16 5 and 12 and 15 1805
17 (animal not (animal and human)).sh. 1361790
18 16 not 17 1796
19
limit 18 to (embase and (danish or english or norwegian or swedish) and yr="2000 -Current"
and (article or conference paper or "review")) 860

Database: The Cochrane Library
Date: 2013-02-26
No of results: 84
Cochrane reviews 0
Other reviews 6
Trials 53
Technology assessments 20
Economic evaluations 5
ID Search Hits
#1 MeSH descriptor: [Heart Failure] explode all trees 4914
#2 MeSH descriptor: [Ventricular Dysfunction, Left] explode all trees 1479
#3 heart next failure:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched) 8961
#4 left near/3 ventric* near/3 dysfunction*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched) 2043
#5 #1 or #2 or #3 or #4 10047
#6 MeSH descriptor: [Heart-Assist Devices] explode all trees 146
#7 heart-assist next device*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched) 150
#8 left next ventric* next assist next device*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched) 61
#9 left next ventric* next assist next system*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched) 3
#10 ventric* next assist next device*:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched) 84
#11 VAD or LVAD or LVAS:ti,ab,kw (Word variations have been searched) 213
#12 #6 or #7 or #8 or #9 or #10 or #11 344
#13 #5 and #12 84
Database: CRD
Date: 2013-02-26
No of results: 39
Line Search Hits
1 ("heart failure") 1239
2 (left ventric* dysfunction*) 89
3 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Heart Failure EXPLODE ALL TREES 511
4 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Ventricular Dysfunction, Left EXPLODE ALL TREES 91
5 #1 OR #2 OR #3 OR #4 1282
6 MeSH DESCRIPTOR Heart-Assist Devices EXPLODE ALL TREES 48
7
(heart-assist device*) OR (left ventric* assist device*) OR (left ventric* assist system*) OR (ventric* assist
device*) OR (VAD OR LVAD OR LVAS) 73
8 #6 OR #7 73
9 #5 AND #8 39
The web-sites of SBU, Kunnskapssenteret and Sundhedsstyrelsen were visited 2013-02-27
2 results
Reference lists
A comprehensive review of reference lists brought 76 new records 

Reference lists
Included studies:
Aggarwal A, Pant R, Kumar S, Sharma P, Gallagher C, Tatooles AJ, et al. Incidence and management
of gastrointestinal bleeding with continuous flow assist devices.
Annals of Thoracic Surgery. 2012;93(5):1534-40.
Daneshmand MA, Rajagopal K, Lima B, Khorram N, Blue LJ, Lodge AJ, et al. Left ventricular assist
device destination therapy versus extended criteria cardiac transplant.
Annals of Thoracic Surgery. 2010;89(4):1205-9; discussion 10.
Dembitsky WP, Tector AJ, Park S, Moskowitz AJ, Gelijns AC, Ronan NS, et al. Left ventricular assist
device performance with long-term circulatory support: Lessons from the REMATCH trial.
Annals of Thoracic Surgery. 2004;78(6):2123-30.
Drews T, Stepanenko A, Dandel M, Buz S, Lehmkuhl HB, Hetzer R. Mechanical circulatory support
in patients of advanced age. European Journal of Heart Failure. 2010;12(9):990-4.
Goldstein DJ, Naftel D, Holman W, Bellumkonda L, Pamboukian SV, Pagani FD, et al. Continuousflow
heart transplant
heart transplant 
devices and percutaneous site infections: clinical outcomes.
J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012;31(11):1151-7.
Holman WL, Park SJ, Long JW, Weinberg A, Gupta L, Tierney AR, et al. Infection in permanent
circulatory support: heart transplant Experience from the REMATCH trial.
Journal of Heart and Lung Transplantation. 2004;23(12):1359-65.
Hutchinson J, Scott DA, Clegg AJ, Loveman E, Royle P, Bryant J, et al. Cost-effectiveness of left
ventricular-assist devices in end-stage heart failure.
Expert Review of Cardiovascular Therapy. 2008;6(2):175-85.
Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Kormos RL, Stevenson LW, Pagani FD, Miller MA, et al. Fifth INTERMACS
annual report: Risk factor analysis from more than 6,000 mechanical circulatory support patients.
Journal of Heart and Lung Transplantation. 2013;32(2):141-56.
Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, Kormos RL, Stevenson L, Miller M, et al. Long-term mechanical
circulatory support (destination therapy): On track to compete with heart transplantation?
Journal of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery. 2012;144(3):584-603.
Lazar RM, Shapiro PA, Jaski BE, Parides MK, Bourge RC, Watson JT, et al. Neurological events
during long-term mechanical circulatory support for heart failure: the Randomized Evaluation of
Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) experience.
Circulation. 2004;109(20):2423-7.
Long JW, Kfoury AG, Slaughter MS, Silver M, Milano C, Rogers J, et al. Long-term destination
therapy with the HeartMate XVE left ventricular assist device: improved outcomes since the
REMATCH study. Congestive Heart Failure. 2005;11(3):133-8.
Morgan JA, Paone G, Nemeh HW, Henry SE, Patel R, Vavra J, et al. Gastrointestinal bleeding with
the HeartMate II left ventricular assist device. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012;31(7):715-8.
Park SJ, Milano CA, Tatooles AJ, Rogers JG, Adamson RM, Steidley DE, et al. Outcomes in
advanced heart failure patients with left ventricular assist devices for destination therapy.
Circulation: Heart Failure. 2012;5(2):241-8.
Park SJ, Tector A, Piccioni W, Raines E, Gelijns A, Moskowitz A, et al. Left ventricular assist devices
as destination therapy: a new look at survival.[Erratum appears in J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005
Jun;129(6):1464]. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005;129(1):9-17. 

Richenbacher WE, Naka Y, Raines EP, Frazier OH, Couper GS, Pagani FD, et al. Surgical
management of patients in the REMATCH trial.
The Annals of thoracic surgery. 2003(6 Suppl):S86-92.
Rogers JG, Bostic RR, Tong KB, Adamson R, Russo M, Slaughter MS. Cost-effectiveness analysis of
continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices as destination therapy.
Circulation: Heart Failure. 2012;5(1):10-6.
Rogers JG, Butler J, Lansman SL, Gass A, Portner PM, Pasque MK, et al. Chronic Mechanical
Circulatory Support for Inotrope-Dependent Heart Failure Patients Who Are Not Transplant
Candidates. Results of the INTrEPID Trial.
Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2007;50(8):741-7.
Rose EA, Gelijns AC, Moskowitz AJ, Heitjan DF, Stevenson LW, Dembitsky W, et al. Long-term use
of a left ventricular assist device for end-stage heart failure.
New England Journal of Medicine. 2001;345(20):1435-43.
Sharma V, Deo SV, Stulak JM, Durham LA, 3rd, Daly RC, Park SJ, et al. Driveline infections in left
ventricular assist devices: implications for destination therapy.
Annals of Thoracic Surgery. 2012;94(5):1381-6.
Slaughter MS, Rogers JG, Milano CA, Russell SD, Conte JV, Feldman D, et al. Advanced heart
failure treated with continuous-flow left ventricular assist device. New England Journal of Medicine.
2009;361(23):2241-51.
Topilsky Y, Pereira NL, Shah DK, Boilson B, Schirger JA, Kushwaha SS, et al. Left ventricular assist
device therapy in patients with restrictive and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Circulation: Heart Failure. 2011b;4(3):266-75.
Systematic reviews and other publications, no appraisal done, only commented on:
Angermayr L, Velasco Garrido M, Busse R. Ventricular assist devices for heart failure.
GMS Health Technol Assess. 2007;3:Doc10.
Clegg AJ, Scott DA, Loveman E, Colquitt J, Hutchinson J, Royle P, et al. The clinical and costeffectiveness
of left ventricular assist devices for end-stage heart failure: a systematic review and
economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess. 2005;9(45):1-132, iii-iv.
Rector TS, Taylor BC, Greer N, Rutks I, and Wilt TJ. Use of Left
Ventricular Assist Devices as Destination Therapy in End-Stage Congestive Heart Failure: A
Systematic Review. Washington DC2012 May. VA-ESP Project #09-009; 2012.
Rogers JG, Bostic RR, Tong KB, Adamson R, Russo M, Slaughter MS. Cost-effectivenss analysis of
continous-flow left ventricular assist devices as destination therapy. Circ:Heart Fail 2012;5:10-16.
Sas G, Boothroyd LJ, Guertin JR, Lambert LJ, Morin JE, Chakor H, et al. Evaluation of the evidence
on the HeartMate II and HeartWare ventricular assist devices for the treatment of chronic end-stage
heart failure (Structured abstract). Health Technology Assessment Database. 2012(1).
Excluded studies:
Adamson RM, Dembitsky WP, Baradarian S, Chammas J, May-Newman K, Chillcott S, et al. Aortic
valve closure associated with HeartMate left ventricular device support: Technical considerations and
long-term results. Journal of Heart and Lung Transplantation. 2011;30(5):576-82.
Adzic A, Patel SR, Maybaum S. Impact of adverse events on ventricular assist device outcomes.
Current Heart Failure Reports. 2013;10(1):89-100. 

Aggarwal A, Raghuvir R, Eryazici P, MacAluso G, Sharma P, Blair C, et al. The development of
aortic insufficiency in continuous-flow left ventricular assist device-supported patients.
Annals of Thoracic Surgery. 2013;95(2):493-8.
Backes D, Van den Bergh WM, Van Duijn AL, Lahpor JR, van Dijk D, Slooter AJC. Cerebrovascular
complications of left ventricular assist devices.
European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. 2012;42(4):612-20.
Barbone A, Pini D, Grossi P, Bandera A, Manasse E, Citterio E, et al. Aspergillus left ventricular
assist device endocarditis. Ital Heart J. 2004;5(11):876-80.
Brush S, Budge D, Alharethi R, McCormick AJ, MacPherson JE, Reid BB, et al. End-of-life decision
making and implementation in recipients of a destination left ventricular assist device.
J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010;29(12):1337-41.
Cowger J, Sundareswaran K, Rogers JG, Park SJ, Pagani FD, Bhat G, et al. Predicting Survival in
Patients Receiving Continuous Flow Left Ventricular Assist Devices: The HeartMate II Risk Score.
Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2013;61(3):313-21. Epub 2012/12/26.
Coyle LA, Ising MS, Gallagher C, Bhat G, Kurien S, Sobieski MA, et al. Destination therapy: oneyear
outcomes in patients with a body mass index greater than 30. Artificial Organs. 2010;34(2):93-7.
Drakos SG, Janicki L, Horne BD, Kfoury AG, Reid BB, Clayson S, et al. Risk Factors Predictive of
Right Ventricular Failure After Left Ventricular Assist Device Implantation.
American Journal of Cardiology. 2010;105(7):1030-5.
Drews T, Dandel M, Krabatsch T, Potapov E, Stepanenko A, Hennig E, et al. Long-term mechanical
circulatory support in 198 patients: largest single-center experience worldwide.
ASAIO Journal. 2011;57(1):9-16.
Girling AJ, Freeman G, Gordon JP, Poole-Wilson P, Scott DA, Lilford RJ. Modeling payback from
research into the efficacy of left-ventricular assist devices as destination therapy.
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care. 2007;23(2):269-77.
Hasin T, Topilsky Y, Schirger JA, Li Z, Zhao Y, Boilson BA, et al. Changes in renal function after
implantation of continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59(1):26-36. Epub 2011/12/24.
Holman WL, Kormos RL, Naftel DC, Miller MA, Pagani FD, Blume E, et al. Predictors of death and
transplant in patients with a mechanical circulatory support device: a multi-institutional study.
J Heart Lung Transplant. 2009a;28(1):44-50.
Holman WL, Pae WE, Teutenberg JJ, Acker MA, Naftel DC, Sun BC, et al. INTERMACS: interval
analysis of registry data.
Journal of the American College of Surgeons. 2009b;208(5):755-61; discussion 61-2.
Kushnir VM, Sharma S, Ewald GA, Seccombe J, Novak E, Wang IW, et al. Evaluation of GI bleeding
after implantation of left ventricular assist device. Gastrointestinal Endoscopy. 2012;75(5):973-9.
Lietz K, Long JW, Kfoury AG, Slaughter MS, Silver MA, Milano CA, et al. Impact of center volume
on outcomes of left ventricular assist device implantation as destination therapy: analysis of the
Thoratec HeartMate Registry, 1998 to 2005. Circulation: Heart Failure. 2009;2(1):3-10.
Lietz K, Long JW, Kfoury AG, Slaughter MS, Silver MA, Milano CA, et al. Outcomes of left
ventricular assist device implantation as destination therapy in the post-REMATCH era: implications
for patient selection. Circulation. 2007;116(5):497-505. 

Long JW, Healy AH, Rasmusson BY, Cowley CG, Nelson KE, Kfoury AG, et al. Improving outcomes
with long-term "destination" therapy using left ventricular assist devices.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2008;135(6):1353-60; discussion 60-1.
Petrucci RJ, Rogers JG, Blue L, Gallagher C, Russell SD, Dordunoo D, et al. Neurocognitive function
in destination therapy patients receiving continuous-flow vs pulsatile-flow left ventricular assist device
support.
J Heart Lung Transplant. 2012;31(1):27-36.
Oz MC, Gelijns AC, Miller L, Wang C, Nickens P, Arons R, et al. Left ventricular assist devices as
permanent heart failure therapy: the price of progress.
Annals of Surgery. 2003;238(4):577-83; discussion 83-5.
Raymond AL, Kfoury AG, Bishop CJ, Davis ES, Goebel KM, Stoker S, et al. Obesity and left
ventricular assist device driveline exit site infection. Asaio J. 2010;56(1):57-60. Epub 2010/01/07.
Rogers JG, Aaronson KD, Boyle AJ, Russell SD, Milano CA, Pagani FD, et al. Continuous Flow Left
Ventricular Assist Device Improves Functional Capacity and Quality of Life of Advanced Heart
Failure Patients. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2010;55(17):1826-34.
Slaughter MS, Sobieski MA, 2nd, Graham JD, Pappas PS, Tatooles AJ, Koenig SC. Platelet activation
in heart failure patients supported by the HeartMate II ventricular assist device.
International Journal of Artificial Organs. 2011b;34(6):461-8.
Slaughter MS, Bostic R, Tong K, Russo M, Rogers JG. Temporal changes in hospital costs for left
ventricular assist device implantation. Journal of Cardiac Surgery. 2011a;26(5):535-41.
Stevenson LW, Miller LW, Desvigne-Nickens P, Ascheim DD, Parides MK, Renlund DG, et al. Left
ventricular assist device as destination for patients undergoing intravenous inotropic therapy: a subset
analysis from REMATCH (Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance in Treatment of
Chronic Heart Failure). Circulation. 2004(8):975-81.
Struber M, Sander K, Lahpor J, Ahn H, Litzler PY, Drakos SG, et al. HeartMate II left ventricular
assist device; early European experience.
European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. 2008;34(2):289-94.
Teuteberg JJ, Ewald GA, Adamson RM, Lietz K, Miller LW, Tatooles AJ, et al. Risk assessment for
continuous flow left ventricular assist devices: does the destination therapy risk score work? An
analysis of over 1,000 patients. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2012;60(1):44-51.
Topilsky Y, Oh JK, Shah DK, Boilson BA, Schirger JA, Kushwaha SS, et al. Echocardiographic
predictors of adverse outcomes after continuous left ventricular assist device implantation.
Jacc: Cardiovascular Imaging. 2011a;4(3):211-22.
Vrtovec B, Radovancevic R, Delgado RM, Radovancevic B, Bracey AW, Gregoric ID, et al.
Significance of anaemia in patients with advanced heart failure receiving long-term mechanical
circulatory support. European Journal of Heart Failure. 2009;11(10):1000-4.
Westaby S, Siegenthaler M, Beyersdorf F, Massetti M, Pepper J, Khayat A, et al. Destination therapy
with a rotary blood pump and novel power delivery.
European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. 2010;37(2):350-6.
Other references:
Braunwald E. Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. Fifth. Philadelphia, PA: WB
Saunders Company; 1997. pp. 783–801.
[Checklist from SBU regarding cohort studies. Version 2010:1]. [Internet]. [cited 2012 Mar 8] 

Available from:
http://www.sahlgrenska.se/upload/SU/HTAcentrum/Hj%c3%a4lpmedel%20under%20projektet/B03_Granskningsmall%20f%c3%b6r%20kohorts
tudier%20med%20kontrollgrupper.doc
[Checklists from SBU regarding randomized controlled trials. [Internet]. [cited 2012 Mar 8] Available
from:
http://www.sahlgrenska.se/upload/SU/HTAcentrum/Hj%c3%a4lpmedel%20under%20projektet/B02_Granskningsmall%20f%c3%b6r%20random
iserad%20kontrollerad%20pr%c3%b6vning.doc
ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure 2012: The Task
Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure 2012 of the European
Society of Cardiology. Developed in collaboration with the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of
the ESC. McMurray JJ, Adamopoulos S, Anker SD, Auricchio A, Böhm M, Dickstein K, Falk V,
Filippatos G, Fonseca C, Gomez-Sanchez MA, Jaarsma T, Køber L, Lip GY, Maggioni AP,
Parkhomenko A, Pieske BM, Popescu BA, Rønnevik PK, Rutten FH, Schwitter J, Seferovic P,
Stepinska J, Trindade PT, Voors AA, Zannad F, Zeiher A; ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines.
Eur Heart J. 2012 Jul;33(14):1787-847.
GRADE Working Group. Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ. 2004
Jun 19;328(7454):1490-4.
GRADE Working Group. List of GRADE working group publications and grants [Internet]. [Place
unknown]: GRADE Working Group, c2005-2009 [cited 2012 Mar 8]. Available from:
http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org/publications/index.htm
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG; PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting
items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS Med.
2009 Jul 21;6(7):e1000097.
Packer M, The neurohormonal hypothesis: a theory to explain the mechanism of disease progression
in heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992 Jul;20(1):248-54
Socialstyrelsen (2008). Hjärtsvikt. Vetenskapligt underlag för Nationella riktlinjer för hjärtsjukvård
2008. [Elektronisk]. Stockholm:
Socialstyrelsen. Tillgänglig:< http://www.socialstyrelsen.se/nationellariktlinjerforhjartsjukvard/>
Zarrinkoub R, Wettermark B, Wändell P, Mejhert M, Szulkin R, Ljunggren G, Kahan T. The
epidemiology of heart failure, based on data for 2.1 million inhabitants in Sweden. Eur J Heart Fail.
2013 Sep;15(9):995-1002.
2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines. Yancy CW,
Jessup M, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Casey DE Jr, Drazner MH, Fonarow GC, Geraci SA, Horwich T,
Januzzi JL, Johnson MR, Kasper EK, Levy WC, Masoudi FA, McBride PE, McMurray JJ, Mitchell
JE, Peterson PN, Riegel B, Sam F, Stevenson LW, Tang WH, Tsai EJ, Wilkoff BL; American College
of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
Circulation. 2013 Oct 15;128(16):e240-327.
Appendix 2 – Included studies with control groups– design and patient characteristics.
PF-LVAD = Pulsatile flow left ventricular device, CF-LVAD = Continuous flow left ventricular device, OMT =Optimal medical therapy.

Author,
Year,
Country
Study Design Study
Duration
(years)
Study
Groups;
Intervention
vs control
Patients
(n)
Mean Age
(years (sd))
Men (%) Outcome variables
Rose,
2001
USA
RCT 0 – 2.5 PF-LVAD
OMT
68
61
66 (9)
68 (8)
78
82
1) Mortality
2) Functional capacity
3) Quality of life
Rogers,
2007
USA
Non-randomised
controlled study
0 – 3.5 PF-LVAD
OMT
37
18
60 (11)
58 (10)
92
78
1) Mortality
2) Functional capacity
3) Quality of life
Slaughter,
2010
USA
RCT 2 PF-LVAD
CF-LVAD
66
134
63 (12)
62 (12)
92
81
1) Mortality
2) Functional capacity
3) Quality of life
Drews,
2010
Germany
Non-randomised
controlled study
2 PF-LVAD
CF-LVAD
64
110
64 (3)
range 60 -73
67 (4)
range 60 – 80
95
89
1) Mortality
Kirklin,
2012
USA
Non-randomised
controlled study
0 – 5.5 PF-LVAD
CF-LVAD
127
1 160
54.7
63.6
Not
reported
1) Mortality
Appendix 3. Excluded articles - Left venticular assist device as destination therapy
Study
(author, publication year)
Reason for exclusion
Adamson 2011 To few cases
Adzic 2013 No new information
Aggarwal 2013 Not included in PICO
Backes 2012 Mixed population
Barbone 2004 To few cases
Brush 2010 Not included in PICO
Cowger 2013 Wrong question
Coyle 2010 Not included in PICO, mixed population
Drakos 2010 Mixed population
Drews 2011 Mixed population
Girling 2007 Theoretic model of cost-effectiveness in LVAD patients
Hasin 2012 Unclear data
Holman 2009a Not included in PICO, predictors
Holman 2009b Substudy of another study
Kushnir 2012 Mixed population
Lietz 2009 Not included in PICO, analysis of risk factors
Lietz 2007 Not included in PICO, risk score
Long 2008 To few patients
Oz 2003
Presentation only of absolute costs of PF-LVADs. No
health economy analysis.
Petrucci 2012 Not included in PICO
Raymond 2010 Question not included in PICO
Rogers 2010 Not included in PICO
Slaughter 2011a Substudy of Slaughter 2009 (included)
Slaughter 2011b Effect not included in PICO
Stevenson 2004 Not included in PICO, risk factor analysis
Struber 2008 Mixed population
Teuteberg 2012 Not included in PICO, risk score analysis
Topilsky 2011b Not included in PICO, echocardiographic predictors
Westaby 2010 Unclear data
Vrotec 2009 Mixed population
Appendix 4. LVAD pulsative flow in comparison with optimal medical management
Outcome variables: a) Mortality b) Functional capacity c) Quality of life
Author, year Country Study
design
Number
of
patients
n=
Followup
With
drawals
-
dropouts
Result Comments
Directness*
Study limitations
*
Precision *
Intervention Control
* + No problem
 ? Some problems
 - Major problems
a) Mortality
Rose, 2001 USA RCT I: 68
C: 61
FU: Not
reported
I: 0
C: 2
1-year survival
52%
p=0.002
2-year survival
23%
NS
1-year survival
25%
2-year survival
8%
? + +
Rogers, 2007 USA Nonrandomised
controlled
study
I: 37
C: 18
FU: 12
months
Not
reported
1-year survival
27%
p=0.02
1-year survival
11%
Patients in the control group
chose not to undergo LVAD
implantation, which resulted in
socio-economical imbalance.
- - -
Appendix 4. LVAD pulsative flow in comparison with optimal medical management
Outcome variables: a) Mortality b) Functional capacity c) Quality of life
Author, year Country Study
design
Number
of
patients
n=
Followup
With
drawals
-
dropouts
Result Comments
Directness*
Study limitations
*
Precision *
Intervention Control
* + No problem
 ? Some problems
 - Major problems
b) Functional
capacity
Rose, 2001 USA RCT I: 68
C: 61
I: 0
C: 2
Walking one block
(not limited at all)
16/23
p=0.04
SF-36 (physical)
46 (sd 19)
p=0.01
Walking one block
(not limited at all)
1/11
SF-36 (physical)
21 (sd 21)
? + +
Rogers, 2007 USA Nonrandomised
controlled
study
I: 37
C: 18
Not
reported
NYHA
85% Class I-II
NYHA
0% Class I-II
No statistical inference test - - -
c) Quality of life
Rose, 2001 USA RCT I: 68
C: 61
I: 0
C: 2
MLHF-score
41 (sd 22)
p=0.11
MLHF-score
58 (sd 21)
MLHF=Minnesota Living with
Heart Failure questionnaire
? + +
Rogers, 2007 USA Nonrandomised
controlled
study
I: 37
C:18
Not
reported
MLHF-score and
SF-36 “improved”
Too few OMT patients for
meaningful comparison.
- - -
Appendix 5. LVAD continuous flow in comparison with pulsatile flow LVAD
Outcome variables: a) Mortality b) Functional capacity c) Quality of life
Author, year Country Study
design
Number
of
patients
n=
Followup
With
drawals
-
dropouts
Result Comments
Directness*
Study limitations
*
Precision *
Intervention Control

* + No problem
 ? Some problems
 - Major problems
a) Mortality
Slaughter, 2009 USA RCT I: 134
C: 66
FU:
2 years
I: 19
C: 32
1-year survival
68%
2-year survival
58%
p=0.008*
1-year survival
55%
2-year survival
24%
? +
(?)
?
Drews, 2010 Germany Nonrandomised

controlled
study
I: 110
C: 64
FU:
2 years
Not
reported
1-year survival:
36%
2-year survival:
26%
p=0.0017*
1-year survival:
15%
2-year survival:
12%
- - ?
Kirklin, 2012 USA Nonrandomised

controlled
study
I: 1,160
C: 127
Not
reported
:
1-year survival
76%
2-year survival
67%
p<0.0001*
1-year survival
68%
2-year survival
45%
Historical controls - ? +
Appendix 5. LVAD continuous flow in comparison with pulsatile flow LVAD
Outcome variables: a) Mortality b) Functional capacity c) Quality of life
Author, year Country Study
design
Number
of
patients
n=
Followup
With
drawals
-
dropouts
Result Comments
Directness*
Study limitations
*
Precision *
Intervention Control
* + No problem
 ? Some problems
 - Major problems
c) Functional
 capacity
Slaughter, 2009 USA RCT I: 134
C: 66
FU:
1 year
I: 19
C: 32
6 minutes walk test
n=61
318 meters (sd 164),
NS
NYHA
76% Class I-II
NS
6 minutes walk test
n=12
306 meters (sd 145)
NYHA
:61% Class I-II
 ? +
(?)
?
d) Quality of life
Slaughter, 2009 USA RCT I: 134
C: 66
FU:
1 year
I: 19
C: 32
MLHF-score
34(sd 22)
p=0.03
MLHF-score
44 (sd 23)
MLHF=Minnesota Living with
Heart Failure questionnaire
? +
?)
?
Appendix 6 Complications
Author. year Country Number
of patients
n=
Length of
follow-up
Type of
device
Infections Bleeding Neurological
complications
Comments

Dembitsky. 2004 USA n=68
unclear
PF-LVAD Sepsis 0.51
Local 0.35
0.6 0.44 Events/patient/Year
Data from REMATCH
Drews. 2010 Germany
n=64
mean 157
days
PF-VAD 27 % 3 % Stroke: 20% Cause of mortality
Holman. 2004 USA n=68
median
408 days
PF-LVAD 42 % Sepsis
Data from REMATCH
Lazar. 2004 USA n=68
unclear
PF-LVAD Neurological event: 44
%
Stroke: 16 %
Data from REMATCH
Long. 2005 USA n=42
mean 232
days
PF-LVAD Sepsis: 0.19
Local: 0.45
Percutaneous: 0.04
Perioperative: 0.15
Later: 0.38
0.15 Events/Patient/Year
Park. 2005 USA n=68
3 year
PF-LVAD Sepsis: 30 % Perioperative
bleeding: 1.5 %
10 % REMATCH 3-year data
Cause of mortality
Richenbacher. 2003 USA n=68
unclear
PF-LVAD Sepsis 0.53
Local: 0.33
Percutaneous or pocket
site: 0.36
Late bleeding: 0.53 Data from REMATCH
Events/Patient/Year
Rogers. 2007 USA n=37
6 months
PF-LVAD 0.25 Cerebrovascular
dysfunction: 0.11
Stroke: 0.08
Events/patient-month
Rose. 2001 USA n=68
median
408 days
PF-LVAD Sepsis: 0.6
Local: 0.39
Driveline: 0.41
0.56 0.39 The REMATCH trial
Events/patient/Year 
Appendix 6 Complications
Author. year Country Number
of patients
n=
Length of
follow-up
Type of
device
Infections Bleeding Neurological
complications
Comments

Aggarwal. 2012 USA n=101
unclear
CF-LVAD 23% Gastrointestinal bleeding
Drews. 2010 Germany
n=110
mean 281
days
CF-LVAD 22 % 6 % Stroke: 25% Cause of mortality
Goldstein. 2012 USA n=2006
8 months
CF-LVAD 9.8 % Driveline infections. Data from
INTERMACS
Kirklin. 2012 USA n=1160
1 year
CF-LVAD 8.1 11.9 1.86 Events/100 patient-months
Kirklin. 2013 USA n=6561 Mostly
CF-LVAD
Device related
infections
15 %. 1 year
30 % 2 years
11 %. 1 year
17 %. 2 years
Data from INTERMACS
Daneshmand. 2010 USA 60
unclear
CF-LVAD 35 % Driveline infection
Morgan. 2012 USA n=86
median
176 days
CF-LVAD 22 % Gastrointestinal bleeding
Park. 2012 USA n=281
median 1.7
years
CF-LVAD Sepsis: 0.27
Local: 0.49
Device related: 0.27
Requiring surgery:
0.14
Neurological event:
0.2
Stroke 0.08
Events/Patient/Year
Sharma. 2012 USA n=143
unclear
CF-LVAD Driveline: 12 % Events/Patient/Year
Slaughter. 2009 USA n=134 CF-LVAD Sepsis: 0.39
Device related: 0.48
Requiring surgery:
0.23
Stroke: 0.13
Other neurological
event: 0.17
RCT
Events/Patient/Year
Total 211 patient-years
Topilsky 2011a USA n=83
30 days
CF-LVAD 59 % 82% 14 %
Appendix 7 - Summary of Findings.
RRR = Relative Risk Reduction; ARR = Absolute Risk Reduction. MLHF=Minnesota Living with Heart Failure. 6MWT=6-minute walk test.
Outcome
variable
Number of
studies
Design Study
limitations
Consistency Directness Precision Publication
bias
Magnitude
of
effect
Relative
effect
(95%CI)
Absolute
effect
(95%CI)
Quality of
evidence
GRADE
PF-LVAD versus optimal medical therapy
Mortality
2
1 RCT
1 nonrandomised

study
No serious
limitations
No
inconsistency
Some
uncertainty
(?)1
Uncertain
precision
(?)2
Unlikely Not
relevant
1-year:
RRR:
33 %
18%
1-year:
ARR:
27%
16 %

Quality of life
2
1 RCT
1 nonrandomised

study
Very serious
limitations
(-2)3
No
inconsistency
Some
uncertainty
(?)
Serious
imprecision
(-1)4
Unlikely Not
relevant
MLHF
score
(0-105):
- 29 %
MLHF
score
(0-105):
-17 points
 
Functional
capacity
2
1 RCT
1 nonrandomised

study
Very serious
limitations
(-2)3
No
inconsistency
Some
uncertainty
(?)
Serious
imprecision
(-1)4
Unlikely Very large SF-36
physical
score
(0-100):
+ 52 %
SF-36
physical
score
(0-100):
+ 24
 
Appendix 7 - Summary of Findings.
RRR = Relative Risk Reduction; ARR = Absolute Risk Reduction. MLHF=Minnesota Living with Heart Failure. 6MWT=6-minute walk test.
Outcome
variable
Number of
studies
Design Study
limitations
Consistency Directness Precision Publication
bias
Magnitude
of
effect
Relative
effect
(95%CI)
Absolute
effect
(95%CI)
Quality of
evidence
GRADE
CF-LVAD versus PF-LVAD
Mortality 1 RCT
2 nonrandomised

studies
Some
limitations
(?)5
No
inconsistency
Some
uncertainty
(?)
Uncertain
precision
(?)2
Unlikely Not
relevant
1-year:
RRR:
27%
24 % - 52%
1-year:
ARR:
13%
20% - 31 %

Quality of life 1 RCT Some
limitations
(?)5
No
inconsistency
Some
uncertainty
(?)
Serious
imprecision
(-1)4
Unlikely Not
relevant
MLHF
score
(0-105):
- 23 %
MLHF
score
(0-105):
-10 points
 
Functional
capacity
1 RCT Some
limitations
(-2)5
No
inconsistency
Some
uncertainty
(?)
Very serious
imprecision
(-1)4,6
Unlikely Not
relevant
6MWT:
+12
meters
 
High quality of evidence =  Low quality of evidence = 
Moderate quality of evidence =  Very low quality of evidence = 
Footnotes:
1. Unclear recruitment and randomization of eligible individuals
2. Wide 95 % confidence interval
3. Selected group of survivors analysed.
4. Few patients
5. Per protocol analysis
6. 95 % confidence interval not stated 
Appendix 8 Ethical analysis
1. From the patient's perspective, how does destination therapy (DT) affect the patient's
quality of life and life expectancy?
The patient will have a longer life expectancy, probably with better quality of life and
functional capacity. In addition, DT may resolve the contraindication to heart transplantation
and thereby restore transplant eligibility, with further expected improvement in quality of life
and life expectancy.
2. How severe is the patient's need that the DT must meet?
The mortality of end stage heart failure is very high, and it is associated with severely reduced
functional capacity, poor quality of life and frequent hospitalisations. The 1-year survival for
patients diagnosed with severe heart failure (NYHA IV) on optimal medical treatment is
below 50 %.
3. Does DT influence the view on humanity or human dignity?
No, probably not from the view of other individuals. However, to have a mechanical device
implanted in your own body may affect the subject’s self-esteem and self-image.
4. Can DT affect the patient’s ability and possibility to be independent?
DT is likely to improve the functional capacity and, thereby, the independency of the patient.
However, continuous need for electric power either from a power base unit or from batteries
may in other ways limit independency. The patient will also need assistance to change the
bandages around the driveline. Thus, total independence will not be achieved.
5. If implemented, does DT require any special steps to not compromise the patient's
autonomy?
DT is likely to introduce a specific challenge to the patient with respect to autonomy. In this
respect it is important to inform the patient extensively about the treatment, including
potential benefits and risks. Also, of importance for the patient’s autonomy is that the DT
program should include the following:
1. Participation of a multidisciplinary care team, including palliative care specialists
2. Adopting a concise plan of care for anticipated device-related complications
3. Planning for anticipated end-of-life care and timing of device deactivation
6. How does DT affect the patient’s physical, moral and personal integrity?
The moral and personal integrity will most probably not be negatively affected by DT.
However the physical integrity is interrupted by the highly invasive nature of the implantation
procedure.
7. Is DT cost-effective?
Attempts to estimate the cost-effectiveness of DT have reported that incremental costs per
quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) are very high. Thus, the cost-effectiveness of DT is
questionable.
8. How does DT affect resources?
DT is a costly treatment. Except for the costs of the device and accessories, DT requires the
use of operation rooms, beds in the intensive care units (sometimes for long periods of time),
many days in the hospital wards, and frequent outpatient follow-up visits. DT complications
will also use resources for clinical work-up and treatment. All of this will compete with the
needs of other patient categories. Thus, unless additional resources can be provided there is a
substantial risk that DT will reallocate current resources from other medical needs. 
Appendix 8 Ethical analysis
9. Is DT in conflict with professional values?
In our opinion, the benefits of DT in highly selected patients will outweigh its risks and,
therefore, are not in conflict with professional values.
10. Does DT change the role of the professional in relation to the patient?
DT is demanding for patients and their families. The patient must be able to comply with the
system, e.g. exchange batteries, and interpret and react to signals from the system monitor.
The bandages around the driveline exit site must be changed regularly with an aseptic
technique.
11. Does DT affect, or does it put any new demands on, a third party?
DT is likely to be challenging for the patient’s family, already from the postoperative phase
and during rehabilitation when the patient is getting accustomed to a new life situation. The
treatment also demands frequent follow-up visits. Bandage exchanges around the driveline
exit site requires assistance. This is often performed by family members or by professional
health care providers.
12. Is there any legislation of relevance with regard to DT?
No.
13. Is there any risk of conflict between DT and values of the society, or values of
different groups?
To prolong life with a mechanical device may be in conflict with the beliefs and norms of
some groups in our society.
14. Is there a risk that an introduction of DT will cause a conflict with particular
interests?
No, probably not.
15. Can an introduction of DT influence the trust of the health care system?
DT is a high-risk treatment for severely debilitated patients and may generate several
complications. Thus, in order to maintain the credibility of the health care system it is of
utmost importance to inform patients and their families about both the benefits and the risks
of the treatment. Also, prerequisite algorithms for clinical work-up, treatment of possible
complications, and other difficult situations that may arise should be established before a DT
program is adopted.
CONCLUSIONS
Introduction of a DT program raises several ethical issues. The self-esteem and self-image of
the individual patient probably varies between subjects, but may be affected in both positive
and negative ways. The patient will still be dependent on assistance from family members
and/or health care providers, and the physical integrity is affected. Without additional
economic resources there is a substantial risk that DT will reallocate current resources from
the needs of other patient categories. 
HTA-centrum
Sahlgrenska Universitetssjukhuset
HTA
Health technology assessment (HTA) is the systematic
evaluation of properties, effects, and/or impacts of health
care technologies, i.e. interventions that may be used to
promote health, to prevent, diagnose or treat disease or for
rehabilitation or long-term care. It may address the direct,
intended consequences of technologies as well as their
indirect, unintended consequences. Its main purpose is to
inform technology-related policymaking in health care.
To evaluate the quality of evidence the Centre of Health Technology Assessment in Region Västra Götaland is
currently using the GRADE system, which has been developed by a widely representative group of international
guideline developers. According to GRADE the level of evidence is graded in four categories:
High quality of evidence = (GRADE )
Moderate quality of evidence = (GRADE O)
Low quality of evidence = (GRADE OO)
Very low quality of evidence = (GRADE OOO)
In GRADE there is also a system to rate the strength of recommendation of a technology as either “strong” or
“weak”. This is presently not used by the Centre of Health Technology Assessment in Region Västra Götaland.
However, the assessments still offer some guidance to decision makers in the health care system. If the level of
evidence of a positive effect of a technology is of high or moderate quality it most probably qualifies to be used in
routine medical care. If the level of evidence is of low quality the use of the technology may be motivated
provided there is an acceptable balance between benefits and risks, cost-effectiveness and ethical considerations.
Promising technologies, but a very low quality of evidence, motivate further research but should not be used in
everyday routine clinical work.
Christina Bergh, Professor, MD.
Head of HTA-centrum
Region Västra Götaland, HTA-centrum
Health Technology Assessment
Regional activity-based HTA

From operations or activity/management:
Question
Clinic-based
HTA
• Training
• Search, sort, and
select process
• Advice, help,
assistance
• Feedback
Quality assurance Support process
process
Main process
External
review
Summarized
assessment
Quality assured decision rationale
Formally
designated
group for
quality assurance
Sahlgrenska Universitetssjukhuset, HTA-centrum
Röda Stråket 8, 413 45 Göteborg
www.sahlgrenska.se/hta-centrum