1
Indications for Ventricle Assist Devices
Guillermo Reyes and Sara Badia
Hospital Universitario La Princesa, Madrid
Spain
1. Introduction
Despite widespread use of evidence-based therapies the morbidity and mortality of heart
failure has not changed, and it remains the most common hospital discharge diagnosis for
patients older than 65 years old of age. Approximately 5 million patients in the United States
of America have cardiac failure, and over 550,000 patients are diagnosed with heart failure
for the first time each year (Levy et al, 2002; Hunt et al, 2005). The European Society of
Cardiology represents countries with a population of more than 900 million, and in their last
guidelines they reported that there are at least 15 million patients suffering this disease in
those 51 countries (Dickstein et al, 2008). Heart failure is primarily a condition of the elderly
(Kannel & Belanger, 1991), and thus the widely recognized “aging of the population” also
contributes to the increasing incidence of heart disease. The incidence of cardiac failure
approaches 10 per 1,000 population after age 65 years, and approximately about 80% of
patients hospitalized with heart failure are older than 65 years old (Masoudi & Havranek,
2002).
There are several reasons that may explain why the prevalence of heart failure is increasing:
ageing of the population, the success in prolonging survival in coronary patients, and the
success in postponing coronary events by effective prevention in those patients at high risk
or those patients who have already survived a first event (secondary prevention) (Senni et
al, 1999). Advances in medical therapy have resulted in improved survival in patients with
moderate and severe heart failure, but the prognosis for end-stage heart failure patients still
remains poor. The conclusion of all these aspects is that there is a change in the
demographics of heart failure patients in recent years, and an increased survival of older
patients with heart disease.
At present time, cardiac transplantation remains the gold standard of cardiac replacement
therapy. However, the supply of donor hearts is limited and therefore is not an option for
many patients because of age and other comorbid conditions. Alternative forms of
cardiac replacement therapy are being investigating. This includes cell therapy,
xenotransplantation, ventricle assist devices implantation and total artificial heart.
Although initially the indications for heart mechanical assistance are similar to those
developed in the1960s for the use of intra-aortic balloon pumps the indications have
developed into more complex cases which must be considered. Ventricle assist devices are
more and more reliable and its size is becoming smaller with the passing of time, improving
patient’s outcomes.
www.intechopen.com4 Ventricular Assist Devices
2. Cardiac transplantation: where we are and what can we expect
The first human cardiac transplant was performed by Dr. Barnard in Cape Town in South
Africa in 1967. With the development of immunosuppression, orthotopic cardiac
transplantation, what exists today, is a highly successful procedure for the treatment of endstage
heart disease. Over time, survival of patients undergoing orthotopic heart
transplantation has improved significantly, mainly due to a reduction in rejection rates,
better prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections and defined management
protocols (Taylor D et al, 2008).
Indications for cardiac transplantation at the present time include patients with severe heart
failure symptoms, a poor prognosis, and with no alternative form of treatment (class of
recommendation I, level of evidence C). Contraindications to heart transplantation are:
current alcohol and/or drug abuse, lack of proper cooperation, serious mental disease not
properly controlled, treated cancer with remission and, 5 years follow-up, systemic disease
with multiorgan involvement, active infection, significant renal failure (creatinine clearance
<50 mL/min), irreversible high pulmonary vascular resistance (6–8 Wood units and mean
transpulmonary gradient >15 mmHg), recent thromboembolic complications, unhealed
peptic ulcer, evidence of significant liver impairment, or other serious co-morbidities with a
poor prognosis. Patients must be well informed, motivated, emotionally stable, and capable
of complying with intensive medical treatment.
According to the registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation
reported in 2008 (Taylor D et al, 2008) the one-year survival after primary orthotopic cardiac
transplantations has increased from 79% between 1982 and 1991, to 82% between 1992 and
2001, and to 86% between 2002 and 2005 (p<0.0001). However, long-term mortality has not
changed and in fact the overall survival patterns remain largely unchanged with a steep fall
in survival up to 6 months and linear decrement in survival thereafter, at approximately
3.5% per year (figure 1)
Some factors need to be in consideration, as they are changing the demographics of heart
transplantation. The primary cardiac transplantation has shifted in the last years towards a
Fig. 1. Kaplan-Meier survival for all cardiac transplants (1/1982-6/2006) (Taylor D et al,
2008)
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 5
slight predominance of patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathy (50%) vs. ischemic
(34%). It is a fact that the relative contribution of patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy has
declined over the last decade. Also the age of donors and recipients has increased in the past
20 years. Almost 25% of cardiac transplant patient recipients in the last years were over the
age of 60 years, with a relative fall in the number of recipients aged 40-49 years. Also at the
present time the number of transplants being performed worldwide is far outnumbered by
the number of potential candidates, as donor hearts are a very limited resource. These
aspects are essential in the understanding of patient outcomes and they explain why other
alternatives to heart transplantation should be investigated in an effort to offer alternative
therapies to those patients suffering severe heart failure.
The need for those alternative therapies include the lack of cardiac donors, long cardiac
transplantation waiting list, patients with any contraindication to cardiac transplantation
(definitive or temporal) and patients requiring more time for the heart to recover.
The use of ventricle assist devices has acquired an important role in the management of endstage
heart failure and it is very likely that its importance will increase with time.
Historically, the development of cardiopulmonary bypass technology in the fifties was the
achievement that really started the development of more permanent means of mechanical
cardiac support. Technological progress has allowed the design and production of smaller
devices that have bridged patients towards recovery and transplantation.
In this chapter we will review the indications of ventricle assist devices implantation. We
will star giving some general indications that every patient should follow from a theoretical
point of view. Then we will divide the indications in three different groups: 1) bridge to
transplantation, 2) bridge to recovery and 3) destination therapy.
We will also discuss when it is required to use a short term ventricle assist device, a long
ventricle assist devices and the total artificial heart. Finally we will review in the literature
when it is necessary to have a right ventricle assist device especially when a left ventricle
assist device is already implanted.
The authors would like to remark that this chapter is a compilation of the literature
regarding ventricle assist device therapy. Therefore each patient must be considered as a
particular case and there are no strict rules or guidelines to be followed.
3. General indications for ventricle assist device implantation
The general rule is simple: ventricle assist devices are used when the heart is incapable of
maintaining its function. Therefore, the organism is in danger or is going to be in danger
because cardiac output is not enough to maintain vital organ flow. Cardiac dysfunction may
be caused in an acute fashion, like in a cardiogenic shock caused by an extensive myocardiac
infarction or after a major cardiac surgery when a patient is not able to weaned from the
heart-lung machine. Also, cardiac failure may be a consequence of a chronic condition like
in the ischemic chronic heart disease or in patients with dilatated myocardiopathy.
There are some registries that compile from different centers the indications for a ventricle
assist devices implantation. These registries are a good resource of information about what
the indications of ventricle assist device are. One of the databases is the Interagency Registry
for Mechanical Assisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS), which is an audited registry
for patients who receive a mechanical circulatory support device to treat advanced
medically refractory heart failure. From June 2006 to December 2007, a total of 75
institutions in the United States of America prospectively entered 420 patients. Most of the
www.intechopen.com6 Ventricular Assist Devices
patients (n=336) had a mechanical circulatory support device implanted for the indication of
bridge to transplantation. The indication of destination therapy was applied in 63 patients
whereas the rest of patients received a ventricle assist device as a bridge to recovery
(Holman et al, 2009). This perfectly describes what the indications in the clinical practice are
at the present time. Several aspects must be considered for indicating a ventricle assist
device:
3.1 Clinical status
Patients requiring a ventricle assist device suffer severe heart failure acutely or chronically.
When cardiac failure has been caused acutely, the patient is in cardiogenic shock. This may
be from different causes: extensive acute myocardial infarction (Killip IV), mechanical
complications after an infarction (papillary muscle rupture, interventricular septal rupture),
patients that cannot be weaned from the cardiopulmonary bypass machine, acute
myocarditis and others. It should be noticed that the use of ventricle assist device in the
setting of cardiogenic shock must be contemplated when the use of inotropes and intraaortic
ballon pump is not enough to maintain an adequate cardiac output and there is a risk
of death or other organ failure. Also, there should be no other options such as major cardiac
surgery or other surgical options that may reverse the status of the patient.
However, although ventricle assist devices are not the first treatment option in this type of
situation, their implantation should not be delayed. Most cardiologist and cardiac surgeons
agree to implant a ventricle assist device in patients with severe heart failure, despite intraaortic
balloon pump or inotropic support with unstable hemodynamics, and with early
signs of end-organ dysfunction (Osaki et al, 2009). In the last years, there has been an
attempt to prevent deterioration of the ventricle assist device candidate’s condition.
Actually, whenever possible some co-morbid conditions should be nullified by a period of
therapy prior to implant. Some examples are renal dysfunction, localized infection or severe
pulmonary edema, which can be reversed with medical therapy prior to a mechanical
device implantation. Every patient should be in the best clinical position, considering that
these patients are in a really bad clinical status, avoiding the implantation in pre-mortem
conditions. This rule should also be applied in those patients with end-stage chronic cardiac
dysfunction. Mechanical device implantation should be kept in mind before other organs
deteriorate. This will definitely improve clinical outcomes. Other clinical conditions that
may indicate the use of some mechanical support are intractable arrhythmias and intractable
angina not responsive to medical therapy or revascularization procedures in patients with
poor left ventricle function.
3.2 Hemodynamic parameters
A hemodynamic study may be required in some situations to assure that cardiac function is
severely deteriorated. Table 1 summarizes hemodynamic data that represent severe left and
right ventricle dysfunction.
4. Ventricle assist device as bridge to transplantation
As we have previously descibed in the introduction section, orthotopic cardiac transplantation
is the gold standard for treating end-stage heart failure. The International Society for Heart
and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) has reported outcome data on transplant recipients for
more than 25 years with data that includes more than 74,000 patients (Taylor et al, 2008).
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 7
Left ventricle assist device Right ventricle assist device Biventricular ventricle
assist device
Systolic blood pressure
<90mmHg
Right atria pressure >
20mmHg
Right atria pressure >
20mmHg
Left atria pressure >
20mmHg
Left atria pressure <
15mmHg
Left atria pressure >
20mmHg
Systemic vascular
resistance >2,100 dynessec/cm

No tricuspid regurgitation No tricuspid regurgitation
Urine output <20mL/h Inability to maintain left
ventricle assist device flow
>2.0L/min/m2 with right
atrial pressure >20mmHg
Table 1. Haemodynamic indications for circulatory assist device
This registry includes data mainly from USA and European countries. We see from those
reports that primary indications for cardiac transplantation has changed with an increase of
patients with nonischemic cardiomyopathy and less ischemic patients. In addition, the age
of donors and recipients has been increasing in the last 20 years, especially in Europe. It is
clear that heart donors are a limited resource and some patients die while awaiting cardiac
transplantation due to that lack of donors. Actually, in the last two decades, decreasing
numbers of organ donors have led to longer waiting times for cardiac transplantation and
subsequently increasing mortality. Other patients´ statuses may worsen while waiting and
they may need some kind of cardiac circulatory support in order to maintain vital blood
flow and preserve organ systems like kidney, hepatic, or brain function.
Therefore, we can summarize that ventricle assist device as a bridge to transplantation is
indicated in those patients that are candidates for cardiac transplantation and need some
cardiac support while they are waiting for the heart. This indication includes a wide
spectrum of patients. On one side, we may have patients that suffer an acute event
(postinfarction cardiogenic shock, postcardiotomy) which leads them into an irreversible
severe heart failure that requires urgent cardiac transplantation. Until a donor is found,
cardiac mechanical support is necessary to save patients life and to preserve their vital
organs. As we will see later, organ failure is associated with a worse prognosis after heart
transplantation. On the other side, there are patients that are awaiting cardiac
transplantation and whose conditions become refractory to medical therapy.
At present time, ventricle assist devices are an important tool in the management of this
kind of patient (Frazier at al, 2001; Miller et al, 2007; Russo et al, 2009). Also, in the last
decade, the number of heart transplant recipients supported by ventricle assist devices at the
time of transplantation has more than doubled to over 400 per year in the USA (Taylor DO
et al, 2008) as well as in European countries. This clearly reflects the need of mechanical
circulatory support in patients awaiting transplantation. Also as previously described, if we
consider some registries as the INTERMACS, bridge to transplantation is by far, the most
frequent indication for a ventricle assist device implantation (Holman et al, 2009).
There are some questions that should be answered regarding mechanical circulatory
support as a bridge to transplantation.
www.intechopen.com8 Ventricular Assist Devices
1. Does the use of a ventricle assist device as a bridge to transplantation affect the outcome
of patients when compared to those patients who receive transplants without the need
of mechanical assistance?
2. When should one implant a mechanical device in a patient awaiting cardiac
transplantation?
3. What kind of device should be implanted?
Although several studies have demonstrated the benefits of ventricle assist devices in the
pretransplant period, findings from studies analyzed the impact of mechanical circulatory
support on posttransplant outcomes have conflicted. The majority of studies have concluded
that short term, but not long term, survival is diminished in recipients bridge with a
mechanical device (Taylor DO et al, 2008; Cleveland JC et al, 2008). However, there are some
reports that do not confirm these findings. In a recently published study (Osaki et al, 2009)
Osaki et al compared patients´ outcomes undergoing cardiac transplantation with and
without the use of a ventricle assist device. They also divided patients in two different time
groups as an attempt to analyze both, the experience of the group and the improvement of
devices technology. A total of 531 consecutive heart transplant recipients in a 17 years
period were included. They concluded that post-transplant survival has improved in the last
years. Actually in their study, outcomes for orthotopic heart transplantation after bridge to
transplantation have become equivalent to that of orthotopic heart transplantation without
ventricle assist device. The data suggest that advances in device technology and
multidisciplinary programs, have improved survival and allowed bridges to transplantation
candidates to have an outcome equivalent to that of non-ventricle assist device in recent
times (Figure 2).
Fig. 2. Post-transplant survival by Kaplan–Meier analysis. oOHT, old orthotopic heart
transplant (January 1990 to July 2003); nOHT, new orthotopic heart transplant (August 2003
to August 2007); oBTT, old bridge to transplant (January 1990 to July 2003); nBTT, new
bridge to transplant (August 2003 to August 2007).
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 9
In that study, multivariate analysis revealed that diabetes and biventricular (but no
univentricular) support were the only independent predictors of post-transplant mortality.
These findings have been confirmed by other groups (Russo et al, 2009). In the study
published by Russo et al, they included more than 10,000 heart transplantation recipients
from the United Network for Organ Sharing in a seven-year period. They concluded that the
use of implantable left ventricle assist devices (both intracorporeal and extracorporeal
devices) as bridges to transplantation are not associated with diminished posttransplant
survival. However, an increase in 90-day mortality was seen in patients bridged with
extracorporeal devices.
These findings suggest that more than 80% of well-selected patients implanted with
intracorporeal devices as a bridge to transplantation are successfully transplanted,
providing additional evidence that a more aggressive use of implantable devices may
benefit candidates whose condition is refractory to medical management. Outcomes seem to
be better when implantable device support is implemented before patients clinical status
deteriorates badly. The findings further suggest that a more aggressive use of implantable
support may benefit candidates who are likely to face long waiting times as candidates with
higher body mass index or blood type O. The fact that patient survival is diminished in
patients with extracorporeal devices may suggests that in some cases, candidates supported
by an extracorporeal device may benefit from further optimization before transplantation,
and that this type of devices may be best used as a bridge to an implantable device
especially in those patients that may have long waiting times.
As it has been suggested in other studies (Cleveland et al, 2008), the general perception
among most cardiac transplantation centres is that explantation of a ventricle assist device
confers a more technically challenging operation and therefore, might adversely affect
survival not in medium term but in a short term. In the Cleveland group experience, one
year survival was similar in those recipients receiving a heart transplantation with or
without a mechanical circulatory support. However, when they analyzed patients who died
after transplantation, most of the ventricle assist device group died within 30 days of
transplant. In contrast, only a minority of patients without a mechanical assist device died
within those thirty days.
This may reflect an inherent complexity and higher risk operation that occurs in the
explantation of a ventricle device.
It is essential to have a good knowledge of the heart transplantation situation in every
country. There are some countries such as Spain, where there is a high prevalence of donors
and where the waiting times are not to long. Short term extracorporeal devices may be used
as they are less expensive and very simple to use. Good results can be achieved this way
(Reyes et al, 2007). In other countries like Germany or the USA where the waiting times are
much longer, long term assistance may be a better option (Korfer et al, 1999).
5. Ventricle assist device as bridge to recovery
Ventricle assist devices have been successfully implanted in patients who are expected to
recover sufficient myocardial function and it is not expected that they will need a cardiac
transplantation. In this type of patient a short-term bridge to recovery device may be a good
option as these devices are less expensive and very easy to use (Samuels et al, 2005; Nicolini
& Gherti, 2009). The most frequent clinical settings in which a mechanical circulatory
support may be needed are described below:
www.intechopen.com10 Ventricular Assist Devices
5.1 Post-cardiotomy
Patients with compromised left ventricle function who have undergone long operations may
need a ventricle assist device because the severity of the postoperative circulatory shock. It
is estimated that about 5% of patients undergoing coronary or valve cardiac procedures will
have some degree of postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock (Pae et al, 1992). Short term
mechanical support as bridge to recovery has been successfully used in patients who are
expected to recover sufficient myocardial function. Since the ABIOMED system was
approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1992, it has become the second most
commonly used mechanical support device for patients with post-cardiotomy ventricular
dysfunction after the intra-aortic balloon pump with excellent rates of myocardial recovery
and device removal after short-term support (Morgan et al, 2004). We highly recommend
the early implantation of mechanical circulatory assistance in this clinical setting to provide
mechanical unloading of the ventricle and rapid restoration of normal end-organ perfusion
in order to improve survival rates.
In those patients in whom a high risk of cardiac failure is anticipated (severely impaired
ventricular function undergoing high risk cardiac procedures) transplant evaluation should
be initiated preoperatively and the procedure performed with a ventricle assist device back
up. If needed it, mechanical support may be used as bridge to recovery or bridge to
transplantation.
5.2 Post acute myocardial infarction shock
Despite the advances in the management of cardiogenic shock secondary to acute
myocardial infarction, the prognosis is still poor with mortality rates as high as 70%
(Goldberg RJ et al, 1999). There are some aspects that must be considered in this clinical
setting. One of the surgical dilemmas, when implanting an LVAD into a patient with an
acute anterior wall myocardial infarction, is the safety of apical cannulation in the presence
of acutely infarcted apical myocardium, which is typically necrotic and friable. Ventricular
disruption and bleeding from the cannulation site are major concerns with lethal
consequences. Although left atrial cannulation is an option, it is suboptimal as it affords
inadequate left ventricular decompression and limits LVAD inflow. Furthermore, left atrial
cannulation has been shown to have independent risk factors for the development of left
ventricular thrombus and stroke. There are some surgical techniques that should be
considered. Some authors have maintained that left ventricle devices can be safely
implanted into acutely infarcted, friable myocardium by modifying their surgical technique.
This involves placing cannulation sutures through the full thickness of the infarcted
ventricular myocardium and reinforcing their suture line with pericardium or Teflon felt
(Park SJ et al, 2000; Chen et al, 1999). Other technique used in patients with cardiogenic
shock and with extensive anterior wall infarcts, consists of securing the cannula with
interrupted, pledgeted, horizontal mattress sutures through the full-thickness of the
infarcted myocardium. If significant bleeding is observed, additional sutures and/or
haemostatic products can be applied to the cannulation site (Leshnower et al, 2005).
It is important to highlight that patients with ventricle assist devices due to cardiogenic
shock after an acute myocardial infarction may follow different outcomes. In this situation
there should be flexibility to the treatment algorithm that these patients may follow.
Mechanical circulatory system may be used as a bridge to recovery, a bridge to bridge (to
other long term assist device system) or as a bridge to transplant. Also, some authors
consider that the use of a biventricular assist device is important in these patients
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 11
(Leshnower et al, 2005). This must be taken in consideration in right ventricular heart
failure, intractable arrhytmias and in the presence of shock with multisystem organ failure.
Recently, some authors consider that less invasive percutaneous ventricular assist devices
may be helpful in the decision making of the treatment as they are less expensive and
sternotomy is not required, which may helps subsequent transplantation or surgically
ventricle assist device insertion (Brinkman et al, 2010).
5.3 Myocarditis
Myocarditis may cause severe cardiac failure, sometimes very acutely. It is believed that
almost every infectious agent can cause myocarditis (bacterias, virus, spiroquetas, mycotic
infections, parasital agents, ricketsias). Also there may be immunologic causes as the so call
giant cells myocarditis in which, apart from inmunosupresor therapy, ventricle assist device
may be needed. These patients trend to be younger (many of them children) and it is
characterized by an unpredictable clinical course. Actually it remains a real challenge to
determine which group of patients will recover and which will require mechanical support
or heart transplantation (Houel R et al, 1999). As myocarditis is an inflammatory process
that affects the whole myocardium (both the right and left ventricle) it is frequent that
biventricular support is required (Grinda JM et al, 2004). As we have previously said it is
important anticipate the prognosis of the patient in order to convert a short-term assist
device into a long term assist device or cardiac transplantation in those patients in which an
optimal recovery is not expected.
6. Destination therapy
Ventricle assist device as a destination therapy has some aspects that may concern
cardiologists and cardiac surgeons. It is necessary to know how the mechanical devices may
affect survival rates compared with alternative treatment strategies, the durability of the
devices, and its safety profile. Also we must take into account the quality of life of these
patients and if the up-front costs of implantation may be offset by the long-term benefits of
the patients.
The Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive
Heart Failure (REMATCH) trial is a multicentered study supported by the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute. It compares long-term implantation of left ventricular assist
devices with optimal medical management for patients with end-stage heart failure who
require, but do not qualify to receive cardiac transplantation. This trial demonstrated that
the implantation of left-ventricular assist devices decreased the 1-year mortality by a third
(from 75% down to 51%) and the two year survival rate was 29% for left ventricle assist
device patients versus 13% for medical patients (95% CL; 5%-22%), representing a 48 percent
reduction in the risk of death from any cause, compared with the optimal medical therapy.
The survival advantage was associated with a considerable improvement in the quality of
life and functional status of these patients, as compared with their medical counterparts
(Rose et al., 1999). The MLHF scores, (Minnesota Living with Heart Failure questionnaire)
for left ventricle assist device patients were 75.1 (0 being the best – 105 the worst). The
REMATCH trial demonstrated that is superior to any available medical therapy in patients
with end-stage heart failure who are not eligible for transplantation (Lietz & Miller, 2005).
The Thoratec HeartMate was subsequently approved in 2003, by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), for long-term support of this kind of patient.
www.intechopen.com12 Ventricular Assist Devices
The next logical step for expanding the indications for mechanical circulatory assistance
would be to use the left ventricle assist device as an alternative to cardiac transplantation.
However, heart transplantation cannot serve the estimated 30,000–60,000 people who die of
heart failure in the US each year and could be candidates for heart transplantation or some
form of mechanical circulatory support. More than 40% of the patients waited more than 1
year for a cardiac transplantation, and the waiting time is increasing every year. In 1995, the
average waiting time for cardiac transplantation was over 200 days (Penningtonet al., 1999),
but the average national waiting time in 2003 for a heart was 230 days (UNOS/OPTN
Annual Report 2003). Each year, approximately 4000 new patients are added to the waiting
list for cardiac transplant, and about 28,000–30,000 are apparently not considered viable
candidates to be placed on the list. About 50%of the patients not included in the waiting list
(13,000) would be candidates for a permanent ventricular assist device. An important
deterrent to being listed may be advanced age.
The most obvious advantage of these mechanical device systems over transplantation would
be their immediate availability. They could be placed in UNOS status II rather than UNOS
status I hospital-bound patients. Table 2 shows the indications and characteristics of the
total artificial heart.
Total artificial
heart Characteristics Use Cost
Abiomed Total
Artificial Heart
TAH is currently
undergoing clinical
trials
CardioWest
device
Is inserted
orthotopically; this
procedure is
accompanied by
removal of the
patient's own
ventricles
Pneumatic TAH that
has been used
investigationally as a
bridge to
transplantation
The cost of these
devices is likely to be
quite high, but may
not be very different
from the cost of heart
transplantation,
therapy and
immunosuppression.
Table 2. Indications and characteristics of the total artificial heart. TAH: Total artificial heart.
6.1 Exercise capacity
An important determinant of quality of life in cardiac transplant recipients and left ventricle
assist device recipients is exercise capacity.
Studies in cardiac transplant recipients demonstrate that, at rest, they have an increased
heart rate, increased blood pressure, and low normal cardiac output. During exercise, peak
heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output, peak power output, pulse pressure, heart rate
reserve, total VO2, and absolute VO2 at ventilatory threshold are all less than normal. Their
exercise capacity may increase with time up to 5 years and may improve with an increase in
muscle mass and lean body weight. Autonomic reenervation may actually increase the peak
heart rate during exercise, although this is quite controversial. Recent studies suggest that
cavo-caval anastomosis may increase atrial emptying, resulting in better functional capacity.
While some individual patients with cardiac transplantation function well, most patients
have important physiological limitations.
The exercise capacity of patients with implantable mechanical cardiac devices is based on
the results obtained during the use like bridge to transplant, it is apparent that improvement
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 13
in exercise tolerance occurs. Maximum VO2 is a well-characterized indicator of functional
status and prognosis in patients with advanced heart failure.
Peak oxygen consumption with upright treadmill exercise increased from 10 to 14 mL
O2/kg/min in a group of patients supported for a mean of 50 days after left ventricle assist
device implantation. Pennington et al remarked that many postoperative studies suggest
that the native left ventricle may contribute to this function during exercise by actively
filling the left ventricle assist device, which reduces filling time and overcomes inflowing
cannula impedance. It may also augment total cardiac output with parallel ejection out of
the native aortic valve and reduce ventricular interaction-related changes in functional right
ventricular diastolic compliance.
It is clear that exercise capacity increases during the first several months after ventricle assist
device insertion because patients have improved organ function, reducing pulmonary
edema and pulmonary artery resistance. These changes significantly augment right
ventricular function, which also usually improves with time.
It is anticipated that patients with long-term left ventricle assist devices will achieve
reasonably high levels of exercise capacity and they will not be limited by activities of daily
living. Whether they will be able to participate in athletic events and vigorous work is not
entirely clear, but seems feasible (Pennington et al., 1999).
6.2 Psychological factors
A common sensation between the patients with left ventricle assist devices is that of being
machine-dependent. It is important to indicate a definitive cardiac assist device in very
strongly motivated patients which may need to be prepared from a psychological point of
view. A positive psychological feature is the fact that left ventricle assist device insertion
does not require removal of the natural heart, which might be able to temporarily support
the circulation, or recover sufficiently to allow for device removal.
Quality of life may be reasonably satisfactory. Despite externalized battery sources, these
patients are capable of recovering their daily activities, even returning to work. Although
patients are capable of concealing external batteries so that it is not so obvious that they are
supported mechanically, they cannot forget that they are dependent on the device. This
factor may be resolved with new more modern devices that can be completely implanted
inside the pericardium or the peritoneum. Presuming the availability of a safe and effective,
totally implantable, electrically driven, left ventricle assist devices prompts a comparison
with the current strategy of cardiac transplantation as a universal therapy for patients with
severe heart failure.
6.3 Economical factors
It is very important to be aware of the cost of the implantation of definitive mechanical
devices. Since there are limited resources availables, it is necessary to demonstrate that they
are economically feasible. The average total cost to insert a left ventricle assist device in the
REMATCH patient population was $210,187 which includes a $60,000 charge for the device.
When implantation hospitalization costs are compared between hospital survivors and
nonsurvivors, the mean costs increase from $159,271 ± 106,423 to $315,015 ± 278,713.
Sepsis, pump housing infection, and perioperative bleeding are the major drivers of
implantation cost, established by regression modeling. In the patients who survived the
procedure, bypass time, perioperative bleeding, and late bleeding were the drivers of cost.
www.intechopen.com14 Ventricular Assist Devices
The average annual readmission cost per patient for the overall cohort was $105,326, the cost
of which was considerably influenced by device reliability (Oz et al, 2003).
In a recent study published by the Institute of Medicine, cost effectiveness was measured by
the relationship of costs to quality-adjusted life years (QALYs). It was estimated that the cost
per quality-adjusted life years in dollars for hemodialysis was $50,000, for two-vessel
coronary artery bypass grafting, $34,000, and for a total artificial heart for 2 years,
approximately $105,000.
The cost calculation of quality-adjusted life years for left ventricle assist devices was not
calculated, but it was estimated that it would be significantly less than that for a total
artificial heart.
If the devices can be relatively problem free and not require multiple readmissions for
replacement of parts or devices, employers may be receptive to these patients returning to
work. It is not known whether the relatively low reemployment percentage for cardiac
transplant patients is related to their need to continue to take expensive medications or
other medical problems.
It is possible that within four years, one could return to society with an income greater in
value than the investment if the individual earns an annual salary of $40,000 per year.
However, by Poirier’s estimation, circulatory support systems represented a potential to
increase our gross national product, leading to a higher standard of living.
The current generation of pumps continue to undergo incremental improvement. These
devices exhibit smaller and more flexible drivelines or use a totally implantable design that
eliminates a major gateway for infection. They are being introduced in clinical trials that may
more fundamentally address the device´s shortcomings observed in the REMATCH study.
7. Short, long and intermediate ventricle assists devices
We can divide the ventricle assist devices according to its capacity to be used as support
during a short, long, or intermediate time, depending on the requirements of patients. The
following tables describe the indications and the more notable characteristics of the different
kinds of ventricular assist devices.
7.1 Intermediate ventricle assist devices
Fig. 3. ABIOMED BVS 5000 blood pump.
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 15
Intermediate
term devices Indications Versions Use Advantages
Thoratec VAD
Thoratec
Paracorporeal
ventricular Assist
Device (PVAD)
Thoratec
Implantable
Ventricular Assist
Device (IVAD)
The device uses suction
drainage with pulsatile flow.
Each ventricle costs
approximately $50,000 but can
be maintained with minimal
personnel
PVAD has supported patients
for up to 3.3 years
Abiomed AB
5000
Bridge to
transplantation
Bridge to
recovery
RVAD
LVAD
BiVAD
It is compatible with the
cannulae for the Abiomed BVS
5000 support system
Table 3. Intermediate ventricle assist devices: Indications and characteristics. Intermediate
term devices can be thought of as the true “bridges” to transplantation. They are intended to
be removed during transplantation and are not designed for constant, permanent support.
7.2 Short ventricle assists devices
Short term
VAD Specific indications Common indications Use Insertion Limitation
Centrifugal
pumps:
ï Bio-Medicus
ï Sarns
Patients who cannot
be weaned from
cardiopulmonary
bypass.
Patients who are
awaiting cardiac
transplantation.
RVAD
LVAD
BiVAD
Sternotomy
Percutaneously
(in the
catheterization
laboratory)
Non-pulsatil flow
The devices are
traumatic to blood,
causing hemolysis.
Patients are unable
to ambulate or
exercise with the
device in place.
Extracorporeal
pump:
ï Abiomed
biventricular
system (BVS
5000)
ï AB5000
It allows recovery of
end organs and is
approved for
postcardiotomy use.
Patients with
potentially reversible
heart failure.
Donor heart
dysfunction following
transplantation.
RVAD
LVAD
BiVAD
Sternotomy
The devices are
more expensive
than centrifugal
pumps, but can be
maintained with
minimal
personnel.
Axial flow
pumps:
Impella
microaxial
flow device
Postcardiotomy failure Sternotomy
Percutaneously
Nonpulsatile flow.
Moderate degree
of hemolysis and
thrombocytopenia.
Percutaneous
left atrial-tofemoralarterial
VAD:
Tandem
Heart™
Stabilization until
recovery of
jeopardized
myocardium.
Bridge to definite
surgical treatment.
VAD/cardiac
transplant backup in
patients undergoing
high risk surgical
procedures
Patients with
unanticipated postoperative
cardiac
dysfunction who
required mechanical
support with VAD
support of the right
ventricles or less
commonly both
ventricles.
Post-operative
cardiogenic shock.
 Percutaneously
Complications
such as severe
bleeding and acute
limb ischemia are
more common
Table 4. Intermediate ventricle assist devices: Indications and characteristics.
www.intechopen.com16 Ventricular Assist Devices
7.3 Long ventricle assists devices
Long term
devices Indications Versions Use Advantages Disadvantages
Novacor
device
Replacement
therapy for
patients with
heart failure
 LVAD
Requires
normal native
aortic valve
HeartMate
I
(pulsatil
flow)
HeartMate I is
a paracorporeal
device that
comes in two
versions:
implantable
pneumatic (IP)
and ventedelectric
(XVE)
versions
XVE
only in a
LVAD
Anticoagulation with warfarin
not required. Low
thromboembolic rate.
Outpatient support appears to be
cost-effective
Improvement in renal function
and reduction in pulmonary
hypertension prior to
transplantation.
Improvement in hemodynamic
measurements at rest and during
exercise and exercise capacity
Expensive
device
HeartMate
II
Bridge to
transplantation.
Destination
therapy.
Smaller devices
and greater
durability
Improvements in NYHA
functional class, six minute walk,
and quality of life
Axial-flow
impeller
pumps
Bridge to
myocyte
recovery.
Transplantation
Long-term
support
Jarvik 2000
pump
DeBakey pump
RVAD
Small size
Low noise
Absence of a compliance
chamber.
The device is practically
encapsulated by the native
myocardium, reducing the risk of
infection around the device.
Quality of life improved
significantly
Centrifugal
continuous
flow
pumps
Undergoing a
clinical trial as a
bridge to
transplantation
in the US.
Ventrocor
VentrAssist
LVAD.
Heartware
HVAD.
Terrumo
Duraheart.
Energetically more efficient
Lower tolerances so
manufacturing is easier and they
are less prone to thrombosis
They are potential very durable
(>10 year life-span)
Fits in the pericardial space.
Table 5. Long ventricle assist devices: Indications and characteristics.
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 17
8. Biventricular assist device: why and when should it be implanted?
It is well described in the literature that between 15-25% of patients with a left ventricle
assist device will develop a right heart failure, even in those patients with a good
preoperative right cardiac function. Severe right ventricle failure, requiring insertion of a
right ventricles assist device, has been proved to negatively affect a successful bridge to
transplant, increase device-related morbidity, prolong hospital length of stay, and increase
total hospital cost (Slater JP et al, 1996; Karavan et al, 2002). This can be explained with the
following:
1. Pre-existing right ventricle dysfunction. This dysfunction may be latent secondary to
the augmented preload presented to the right side following left mechanical device
implantation.
2. Interventricular septal shifting movement. The mechanical unloading of the left
ventricle may displace the interventricular septum which may contribute to impaired
right-sided function.
3. Other perioperative conditions as ischemia, myocardial stunning, embolism or
arrythmias.
It is essential to anticipate which patients will develop right side heart failure, however,
this may be a difficult task. Several papers have reported preoperative risk factors for
development of right ventricle failure in patients with implantable left ventricle assist
devices. A study from Ochiai and colleagues (Ochiai et al, 2002) reported in a large
number of patients that preoperative circulatory support, female gender, and nonischemic
etiology of heart failure were significant predictors of right ventricle failure.
Other risk factors that have been related with the need of right circulatory support are low
pulmonary artery pressure, low right ventricle stroke work index, preoperative
ventilation and higher left ventricle assist device scores (Fukamachi et al, 1999, Morgan et
al, 2004).
Apart from the difficult task of anticipating which patient will require a right ventricle assist
device, another important problem is the difficulty associated with anticipating when it is
the right moment to implant a right ventricle device. It is important to note that while
optimal timing of right ventricle assist device insertion for severe right ventricle failure after
left ventricle assist device implantation has yet to be clearly defined, a low threshold for
early right ventricle assist device insertion may be preferable to subsequent development of
multisystem organ failure that could potentially develop with a more conservative
approach.
Some studies describe that patients with an implantable left ventricle assist device and with
a prompt right ventricle assist device insertion (within 24 hours) have a better outcome than
patients in which the right mechanical device was inserted after the first 24 hours (Morgan
et al, 2004). In general, it is believed that right ventricle assist device insertion should be
performed early after the development of severe right ventricle failure after left ventricle
assist device implantation, and that right ventricle assist device support should be
continued for an adequate duration to allow for right ventricle recovery or until
transplantation. It is essential that while on RVAD support, opportunities to maximally
improve the patient’s hemodynamic status and fluid balance, such as the use of continuous
veno-venous hemofiltration and dialysis, should be pursued.
www.intechopen.com18 Ventricular Assist Devices
Fig. 4. Biventricular assist device. Cannula implantation.
9. Conclusions
Heart transplantation is the gold standard therapy for end stage heart failure disease.
However, there is a lack of donors and some patients have some kind of contraindications.
Ventricle assist devices can be used in different clinical situations. The most common
indication nowadays is bridge to transplantation. As more experience and more modern
devices are available, better the outcomes. Patients being transplanted with a mechanical
device can have as good results as patients without a ventricle device.
In some cases an external cardiac support is required while the heart recovers from an acute
event. Ventricle assist devices can also be used as a bridge to recovery with excellent results
using a short term ventricle device. In patients awaiting a transplantation or with a
contraindication for transplantation a long term cardiac device or the total artificial heart are
very good options in which a high quality of life can be expected.
It is important not to delay ventricle device implantation till there is a severe multi-organ
dysfunction. Patients need to be in the best clinical status when receiving a mechanical
cardiac support. Biventricular assist devices should be kept in mind as right ventricle failure
can happen after a left ventricle device implantation.
10. Acknowledgement
Authors would like to thank Dr. Duarte, Dr. Cañizo and Dr. Nuche for their contribution
and development of the ventricle cardiac devices in Spain. Also we would like to thank our
National Cardiovascular Society for being interested in creating special groups focusing in
cardiac mechanical devices.
11. References
Amir, O.; Aravot, D. & Pizov, R. (2007). Permanent left ventricular assist device for endstage
heart failure: first successful implantation of the axial flow HeartMate II
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 19
rotary pump as destination therapy for heart failure in Israel. Isr Med Assoc J. 9(12),
(Dec 2007) 887-8.
Barker, LE. (1991). The total artificial heart. AACN Clin Issues Crit Care Nurs. 2(3), (Aug 1991)
587-97.
Brinkman, WT.; Rosenthal, JE. & Eichhorn, E. (2009). Role of a percutaneous ventricular
assist device in decision making for a cardiac transplant program. Ann Thorac Surg.
88(5), (Nov 2009) 1462-6.
Chen, EA.; Patel-Raman, SM. & O'Callaghan, K. (2009). FDA's perspectives on
cardiovascular devices. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2(2), (Jun 2009)143-6. Epub 2009 Mar
10.
Chen, JM.; DeRose, JJ. & Slater, JP. (1999). Improved survival rates support left ventricular
assist device implantation early after myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol . 33,
(1999) 1903– 8.
Cleveland, JC Jr.; Grover, FL. & Fullerton. (2008). Left ventricular assist device as bridge to
transplantation does not adversely affect one-year heart transplantation survival. J
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 136, (2008) 774-7.
Copeland, JG.; Arabia, FA. & Tsau, PH. (2003). Total artificial hearts: bridge to
transplantation. Cardiol Clin. 21(1), (Feb 2003) 101-13.
De Paulis, R.; Riebman, JB. & Deleuze, P. (1987). The total artificial heart: indications and
preliminary results. J Card Surg. 2(2), (Jun 1987) 275-81.
Donald, S.; Esmore, F. & David, K. First Clinical Implant of the VentrAssist Left Ventricular
Assist System as Destination Therapy for End-Stage Heart Failure. The Journal of
Heart and Lung Transplantation. 24(8).
Douglas, L.; Mann & James, T. (1998) Left Ventricular Assist Devices and the Failing Heart :
A Bridge to Recovery, a Permanent Assist Device, or a Bridge Too Far? Circulation.
98(1998) 2367-2369.
Esmore, DS.; Kaye, D. & Salamonsen, R. (2005). First clinical implant of the VentrAssist left
ventricular assist system as destination therapy for end-stage heart failure. J Heart
Lung Transplant. 24(8), (Aug 2005) 1150-4.
Fang, JC. (2009). Rise of the machines--left ventricular assist devices as permanent therapy
for advanced heart failure. N Engl J Med. 3;361(23) (Decm 2009) 2282-5. Epub 2009
Nov 17.
Frazier, OH.; Rose, EA. & Oz, MC. (2001). Multicenter clinical evaluation of the HeartMate
vented electric left ventricular assist system in patients awaiting heart
transplantation. . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 112, (2001) 1186-95.
Frazier, OH.; Shah, NA. & Myers, TJ. (2004). Use of the Flowmaker (Jarvik 2000) left
ventricular assist device for destination therapy and bridging to transplantation.
Cardiology. 101(1-3), (2004) 111-6.
Fukamachi, K.; McCarthy, PM. & Smedira, NG. (1999). Preoperative risk factors for right
ventricular failure after implantable left ventricular assist device insertion. Ann
Thorac Surg. 68, (1999) 2181–4.
Goldberg, RJ.; Samad, NA. & Yarzebski, J. (1999). Temporal trends in cardiogenic shock
complicating acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 340, (1999) 1162– 8.
www.intechopen.com20 Ventricular Assist Devices
Gordan, S.; Cristian, R. & Nadia, G. (2009). The Impella® LP 5.0 as a bridge to long-term
circulatory support. Interact CardioVasc Thorac Surg. 8, (2009) 682-683; originally
published online Mar 2, 2009.
Grindal, JM.; Chevalier, P. & D´Attellis. (2004). Fulminant myocarditis in adults and
children:bi.ventricular assist device for recovery. Eur J cardiothorac Surg. 26 (2004)
1169.
Hernandez, AF.; Grab, JD. & Gammie, JS. (2007). A decade of short-term outcomes in post
cardiac surgery ventricular assist device implantation: data from the Society of
Thoracic Surgeons' National Cardiac Database. Circulation. 116, (2007) 606.
Hernandez, AF.; Shea, A. & Milano, C. (2008). Long-term Outcomes and Costs of Ventricular
Assist Devices Among Medicare Beneficiaries. JAMA, 300(20), (2008) 2398-2406.
Hill, JG.; Bruhn, PS. & Cohen, SE. (1992). Emergent applications of cardiopulmonary
support: A multiinstitutional experience. Ann Thorac Surg. 54, (1992) 699.
Holman, WL.; Kormos, RL. & Naftel, DC. (2009). Predictors of death and transplant in
patients with a mechanical circulatory support device: a multi-institutional study. J
Heart Lung Transplant. 28(1), (Jan 2009) 44-50.
Houel, R.; Vermes, E. & Tixier, DB.(1999). Myocardial recovery after mechanical circulatory
support for acute myocarditis: is sustained recivery predictable? Ann Thorac Surg.
68, (1999) 2177.
Hunt, SA.; Abraham, WT. & Chin, MH.;American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines; American College of Chest
Physicians; International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation; Heart
Rhythm Society. ACC/AHA 2005 Guideline Update for the Diagnosis and
Management of Chronic Heart Failure in the Adult: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines. Circulation. 20;112(12), (Sept 2005) 154-235.
Hutchinson, J.; Scott, DA. & Clegg, AJ. (2008). Cost-effectiveness of left ventricular-assist
devices in end-stage heart failure. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 6(2), (Feb 2008) 175-85.
Jonathan, EE.; Yager, MD. & Michael, FG. Left ventricular assist devices as destination
therapy for end-stage heart failure. American Heart Journal. 148(2).
Jurmann, MJ.; Weng, Y. & Drews, T. (2004). Permanent mechanical circulatory support in
patients of advanced age. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 25(4), (Apr 2004) 610-618.
Jurmann, MJ.; Siniawski, H. & Erb, M. (2004). Initial experience with miniature axial flow
ventricular assist devices for postcardiotomy heart failure. Ann Thorac Surg. 77,
(2004) 1642.
Kannel, WB. & Belanger, AJ. (1991). Epidemiology of heart failure. Am Heart J. 121, (1991)
951-7.
Kato, S.; Morimoto, Sm. & Hiramitsu, S. (1999). Use of percutaneous cardiopulmonary
support of patients with fulminant myocarditis and cardiogenic shock for
improving prognosis. Am J Cardiol. 83, (1999) 623.
Kavarana, MN.; Pessin-Minsley, MS. & Urtecho, J. (2002). Right ventricular dysfunction and
organ failure in left ventricular assist device recipients: a continuing problem. Ann
Thorac Surg. 73 (2002) 745–50.
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 21
Kenneth, D.; Alain CS. & Gerasimos F. (2008). ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and
treatment of acute and chronic heart failure 2008. Eur Heart J. 29 (2008) 2388-442
Kherani, AR.; Garrido, MJ. & Cheema, FH. (2003). Nontransplant surgical options for
congestive heart failure. Congest Heart Fail. 9(1), (Jan-Feb 2003) 17-24.
Korfer, R.; El-Banayosy, A. & Arusoglu, L. (1999). Minami K, Breymann T, Seifert D, et al.
Temporary pulsatile ventricular assist devices and biventricular assist devices. Ann
Thorac Surg. 68, (1999) 678-83.
Leshnower, B.; Gleason, T. & O´Hara, M. (2006). Safety and Efficacy of Left Ventricular
Assist Device Support in Postmyocardial Infarction Cardiogenic Shock. Ann Thorac
Surg. 81 (2006) 1365–71.
Levy, D.; Kenchaiah, S. & Larson, MG. (2002). Long-term trends in the incidence of and
survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 347 (2002) 1397–402.
Lietz, K. & Miller, LW. Will left-ventricular assist device therapy replace heart
transplantation in the foreseeable future? Current Opinion in Cardiology. 20 (2),
(March 2005) 132-137 Heart transplantation.
Macris, MP. (1995). Permanent mechanical replacement of the left ventricle. Cardiol Clin.
13(1), (Feb 1995) 111-20.
Mann, DL. & Willerson, JT. (1998). Left ventricular assist devices and the failing heart: a
bridge to recovery, a permanent assist device, or a bridge too far?
Circulation. 98(22), (Dec 1998) 2367-9.
Marelli, D. & Shemin, RJ. (2007). Post-cardiac surgery mechanical support: a tool for
decision making. Circulation. 116, (2007) 586.
Martínez, MV.; Fraile, JR. & Gómez-Arnau, J. (1989). Artificial heart. Management and
clinical utilization. Rev Esp Anestesiol Reanim.. 36(4), (Jul-Aug 1989) 213-8.
Masoudi, FA.; Havranek, EP. & Krumholz, HM. (2002). The burden of chronic congestive
heart failure in older persons: magnitude and implications for policy and research.
Heart Fail Rev. 7, (2002) 9-16.
McCarthy, PM.; Schmitt, SK. & Vargo, RL. (1996). Implantable LVAD infections:
implications for permanent use of the device. Ann Thorac Surg. 61(1), (Jan 1996) 359-
65; discussion 372-3.
McCarthy, PM.; Young, JB. & Smedira, NG. (1997). Permanent mechanical circulatory
support with an implantable left ventricular assist device. Ann Thorac Surg. 63(5),
(May 1997) 1458-61.
Mehmet, C.; Oz, A. & Gelijn, C. (2003). Left Ventricular Assist Devices as Permanent Heart
Failure Therapy The Price of Progress. Annals of Surgery. 238 (4), (2003) 577-585.
Millere, LW.; Pagani, FD. & Russell, SD. (2007). Use of a continuos –flow device in patients
awaiting list transplantation. HeartMate II Clinical Investigators. N Engl J Med. 357,
(2007) 885-96.
Morgan, J.; John, R. & Lee, B. (2004). Is severe right ventricular failure in left ventricular
assist device recipients a risk factor for unsuccessful bridging to transplant and
post-transplant mortality. Ann Thorac Surg. 77, (2004) 859-863.
Morgan, JA.; Stewart, AS. & Lee, BJ. (2004). Role of the Abiomed BVS 5000 device for shortterm
support and bridge to transplantation. ASAIO J. 50, (2004) 360-3.
www.intechopen.com22 Ventricular Assist Devices
Moritz, A.; Wolner, E. & Nose, Y. (1988). Clinical use of the artificial heart, indications and
results. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 100(6), (Mar 1988) 161-7.
Navia, JL.; McCarthy, PM. & Hoercher, KJ. (2002). Do left ventricular assist device (LVAD)
bridge-to-transplantation outcomes predict the results of permanent LVAD
implantation? Ann Thorac Surg. 74(6), (Dec 2002) 2051-62.
Nicolini, F. & Gherti, T. Alternatives to transplantation in the surgical therapy for heart
failure. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 35, (2009) 214-228
Ochiai, Y.; McCarthy, PM. & Smedira, NG. (2002). Predictors of severe right ventricular
failure after implantable left ventricular assist device insertion: analysis of 245
patients. Circulation. 106(Suppl 1), (2002) I198–202.
Osaki, S.; Edwards, NM. & Johnson, MR. (2009). (2009). Improved survival after heart
transplantation in patients with bridge to transplant in the recent era: a 17-year
single-center experience. J Heart Lung Transplant. 28(6), (Jun 2009) 591-7.
Oz, MC.; Gelijns, AC. & Miller, L. (2003). Left ventricular assist devices as permanent heart
failure therapy: the price of progress. Ann Surg. 238(4), (Oct 2003) 577-83.
Pae, WE.; Miller, CA. & Matthews, Y. (1992). Ventricular assist devices for postcardiotomy
cardiogenic shock. A combined registry experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc. 104, (1992)
541.
Pal, JD.; Piacentino, V. & Cuevas, AD. (2009). Impact of left ventricular assist device
bridging on posttransplant outcomes. Ann Thorac Surg. 88(5), (Nov 2009) 1457-61.
Park, SJ.; Nguyen, DQ. & Bank, AJ. (2000). Left ventricular assist device bridge therapy for
acute myocardial infarction. Ann Thorac Surg. 69, (2000) 1146 –51.
Park, SJ.; Tector, A. & Piccioni, W. (2005). Left ventricular assist devices as destination
therapy: A new look at survival. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 129, (2005) 9-17.
Pennington, DG.; Oaks, TE. & Lohmann, DP. (1999). Permanent ventricular assist device
support versus cardiac transplantation. Ann Thorac Surg. 68(2), (Aug 1999) 729-33.
Raman, J. & Jeevanadam, V. (2004). Destination therapy with ventricular assist devices.
Cardiology. 101(1-3), (2004) 104-10.
Reilly, MP.; Wiegers, SE. & Cucchiara, AJ. (2000). Frequency, risk factors, and clinical
outcomes of left ventricular assist device-associated ventricular thrombus. Am J
Cardiol. 86, (2000) 1156.
Reul, H. & Akdis, M. Temporary or permanent support and replacement of cardiac function.
Expert Rev Med Devices. 1(2), (Nov 2004) 215-27.
Reyes, G.; Fernández-Yáñez, J. & Rodríguez-Abella, H. (2007). “Asistencia ventricular
mecánica como puente al trasplante” Rev Esp Cardiol. 60(1), (2007) 72-5.
Rose, EA.; Gelijns, AC. & Moskowitz, AJ. (2001). Randomized Evaluation of Mechanical
Assistance for the Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure (REMATCH) Study
Group. Long-term mechanical left ventricular assistance for end-stage heart failure.
N Engl J Med. 345(20), (Nov 2001) 1435-43.
Russo, MJ.; Hong, KN. & Davies, RR. (2009). Posttransplant survival is not diminished in
heart transplant recipients bridged with implantable left ventricular assist devices. J
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 138(6), (Dec 2009) 1425-32.
www.intechopen.comIndications for Ventricle Assist Devices 23
Samoukovic, G.; Rosu, C. & Giannetti, N. (2009). The Impella LP 5.0 as a bridge to long-term
circulatory support. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 8(6), (Jun 2009) 682-3. Epub 2009
Mar 2.
Samuels, LE.; Holmes, EC. & Garwood, P. (2005). Initial experience with the Abiomed AB
5000 ventricle assist device system. Ann Thorac Surg. 80, (2005) 309-12
Senni, M.; Tribouilloy, CM. & Rodeheffer, RJ. (1999). Congestive heart failure in the
community: trends in incidence and survival in a 10-year period. Arch Intern Med.
159, (1999) 29–34.
Shams, OF. & Ventura, HO. (2008). Device therapy for heart failure: when and for whom?
Am J Cardiovasc Drugs. 8(3), (2008) 147-53.
Shawl, FA.; Domanski, MJ. & Hernandez, TJ. (1989). Emergency percutaneous
cardiopulmonary bypass support in cardiogenic shock from acute myocardial
infarction. Am J Cardiol. 64, (1989) 967.
Shumakov, V.; Zimin, N. & Kazakov, E. (1991). Clinical indications for the use of the "PoiskIOM"
total artificial heart: the experience of 13 implantations in humans. Artif
Organs. 15(5), (Oct 1991) 372-5.
Siegenthaler, MP.; Brehm, K. & Strecker, T. (2004). The Impella Recover microaxial left
ventricular assist device reduces mortality for postcardiotomy failure: A threecenter
experience. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 127, (2004) 812.
Slater, JP.; Rose, EA. & Levin, HR. (1996). Low thromboembolic risk without anticoagulation
using advanced-design left ventricular assist devices. Ann Thorac Surg. 62, (1996)
1321–8
Stevenson, LW. (2004). Left Ventricular Assist Devices as Destination Therapy for End-stage
Heart Failure. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 6(6), (Dec 2004) 471-479.
Tang, DG.; Oyer, PE. & Mallidi, HR. Ventricular assist devices: history, patient selection,
and timing of therapy. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2(2), (Jun 2009) 159-67. Epub 2009
Mar 19.
Taylor, DO.; Edwards, LB. & Aurora, P. (2008). Registry of the International Society for
Heart and Lung Transplantation: twenty-fifth official adult heart transplant
report—2008. J Heart Lung Transplant. 27, (2008) 943-56.
Teirstein, PS.; Vogel, RA. & Dorros, G. (1993). Prophylactic versus standby cardiopulmonary
support for high risk percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 21, (1993) 590.
Thiele, H.; Lauer, B. & Hambrecht, R. (2001). Reversal of cardiogenic shock by percutaneous
left atrial-to-femoral arterial bypass assistance. Circulation. 104, (2001) 2917.
Thiele, H.; Sick, P. & Boudriot, E. (2005). Randomized comparison of intra-aortic balloon
support with a percutaneous left ventricular assist device in patients with
revascularized acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. Eur
Heart J. 26, (2005) 1276.
Vogel, RA.; Shawl, FA. & Tommaso, CL. (1990). Initial report of the National Registry of
Elective Cardiopulmonary Bypass Supported Coronary Angioplasty. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 15, (1990) 23.
www.intechopen.com24 Ventricular Assist Devices
Weitkemper, HH.; El-Banayosy, A. & Arusoglu, L. (2004). Mechanical circulatory support:
reality and dreams experience of a single center. J Extra Corpor Technol. 36(2), (Jun
2004) 169-73.
Wilson, SR.; Givertz, MM. & Stewart, GC. (2009). Ventricular assist devices the challenges of
outpatient management. J Am Coll Cardiol. 54(18), (Oct 2009) 1647-59.
www.intechopen.comVentricular Assist Devices
Edited by Dr. jeffrey Shuhaiber
ISBN 978-953-307-164-0
Hard cover, 212 pages
Publisher InTech
Published online 26, April, 2011
Published in print edition April, 2011
InTech Europe
University Campus STeP Ri
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A
51000 Rijeka, Croatia
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.com
InTech China
Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China
Phone: +86-21-62489820
Fax: +86-21-62489821
The assist devices will continue adding a large number of years of life to humans globally and empower the
medical society to optimize heart failure therapy. While expensive and cumbersome task, the foundation
provided in this book reflects a contemporary product of original research from a multitude of different experts
in the field. We hope this cumulative international effort provides the necessary tools for both the novice as
well as the active practitioner aiming to change the outcome of these complex patients.
How to reference
In order to correctly reference this scholarly work, feel free to copy and paste the following:
Guillermo Reyes and Sara Badia (2011). Indications for Ventricle Assist Devices, Ventricular Assist Devices,
Dr. jeffrey Shuhaiber (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-164-0, InTech, Available from:
http://www.intechopen.com/books/ventricular-assist-devices/indications-for-ventricle-assist-devices