
United States
|
Sales Chat|
24/7 Support
Log In
Home Why GoToAssist Products Pricing
Contact Sales | 1 855 263 2838
Easy, effective tools to support people and technology
TRY IT FREE
BUY IT NOW
Remote Support
Features
How It Works
Ways To Use It
Mobile Device Support
Security and Technology
Case Studies
Fact Sheets
FAQ
Pricing
Try It Free
Service Desk
Enterprise Solutions
Diagnose and Resolve Issues on Mobile Devices
Included at no extra charge with GoToAssist Remote Support.
Tech support in this new mobile world just got a whole lot easier with GoToAssist Remote Support. Set up and provide support to mobile devices so you can get customers up and running quickly and easily.
Here’s how some of our GoToAssist customers are using GoToAssist Remote Support to support mobile devices:
Set up and update email, Wi-Fi and other settings and restrictions on both Android and iOS mobile devices using custom mobile profiles
Quickly identify and address mobile issues on supported Android devices with screen sharing and remote control*
Help users troubleshoot their remote setup or hardware with SeeIt, the GoToAssist camera-sharing feature for Android devices


How It WorksFeatures
GoToAssist provides a toolkit for supporting a variety of smartphones and tablets. You can quickly set up a new mobile device and troubleshoot mobile issues to keep your customers working productively on the go. 

Configure any mobile device
Create customized mobile profiles to pre-define Wi-Fi, email and other mobile device settings. You can then send these profiles to quickly configure new or existing iPhone, iPad or Android devices.

See our video to learn more about mobile device support.


Take control of an Android device
If your customer needs support on an Android mobile device, you can easily get a system summary with device diagnostics info, a list of installed applications, and settings data from his or her device. Use this information to quickly diagnose the issue. Once you’ve found the problem, you can push a custom, pre-defined mobile profile to the device to ensure it’s properly configured. Or, use screen sharing and control the device as if you were holding it yourself.*

To use these features, you must start a remote-support session with the Android device. Ask your customer to download the GoToAssist (Customer) app and connect with you.

* Screen sharing available only on Samsung Android Devices; more to come!


See the issue remotely through
your customer’s camera
 
Visually inspect anything (hardware, machinery and tools) that your remote customer sees from the comfort of your own computer. Android users can share their on-device camera with you in a GoToAssist Remote Support session. 
The customer only needs to start a session with you through the GoToAssist (Customer) app on his or her Android device to take advantage of this feature. 
Many companies charge extra for all mobile device support features. With GoToAssist Remote Support, it’s included with your account at no extra cost. 
 
See our video to learn more. Try GoToAssist Remote Support free for 30 days.
 
 
 
Next Steps
Security & Technology – Learn what makes GoToAssist secure and reliable.
Plans & Pricing – Choose a plan that’s right for you and will allow your business to grow.
Free 30-Day Trial – Sign up to try GoToAssist Remote Support free for 30 days.
Follow Us
   
Home
Why GoToAssist
Press & Awards
Log In
Contact Sales
24/7 Support
GoToAssist
Remote Support
Service Desk
Mobile Device Support
Enterprise Solutions
Resources
Fact Sheets
Security & Technology
Integrations
FAQs
Company
About Us
GoToAssist Blog
Become a Partner
Site Map
Refer A Friend
Terms of Service // Privacy Policy 
©2007-2015 Citrix Systems, Inc. All rights reserved.
Mac, Mac OS, iPad, iPhone and Safari are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. Android is a trademark of Google Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
Explore More GoTo™ Products  
Sales Chat