Skip to main content Skip to main navigation Help with accessibility
Home About Contact Tools Video Choose and Book Communities IPS
Translate
Log in orcreate an account
Go to NHS Choices homepageYour health, your choices



Health A-Z
Hundreds of conditions explained
Arthritis
Asthma
Back pain
Stress, anxiety, depression
Breast cancer
Pregnancy and baby
Diabetes
Dementia
Heart disease
Measles
NHS Health Check
Vaccinations
Online clinics
Common health questions
Symptom checkers
Medicines A-Z
All A-Z topics
Live Well
Over 100 topics on healthy living
Alcohol
Couch to 5K
Teeth and dentistry
Fitness
The flu jab
Healthy eating
Lose weight
Mental health
Pain
Sexual health
Sleep
Stop smoking
Tiredness
Health check tools
All Live Well topics
Care and support
Your essential guide to social care
About social care
Choosing care services
Social care assessments
NHS continuing care
Mental capacity
Home care
Care homes
Breaks from caring
Carers’ rights
Young carers
All care and support topics
Health news
Health news stories unspun
Diet and nutrition
Obesity and weight loss
Neurology and dementia
Lifestyle and environment
Pregnancy and children
Cancer
Drugs and vaccines
Heart and lungs
Medical practice
Older people and ageing
Genetics and stem cells
Mental health
Diabetes
Topical questions and answers
Special reports
All Behind the Headlines news
Services near you
 its your choice
Don't miss out ...
Exercise your right to choice in the NHS
Learn about patient choice now
A&E
Hospitals
GPs
Dentists
Pharmacies
Care homes and care at home
Maternity
Depression
Alcohol
Sexual health
Consultants
Stop smoking services
Urgent care services
All directories
Heart failure 
Share:Email shareTwitter shareFacebook shareSave:Google BookmarksNHS Choices Saved PagesPrint:
Overview
Medicines info
Clinical trials
Heart failure
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
Living with
Introduction 

Heart failure is a condition caused by the heart failing to pump enough blood around the body at the right pressure.
It usually occurs because the heart muscle has become too weak or stiff to work properly.
If you have heart failure, it does not mean your heart is about to stop working. It means your heart needs some support to do its job, usually in the form of medicines.
Breathlessness, feeling very tired and ankle swelling are the main symptoms of heart failure. But all of these symptoms can have other causes, only some of which are serious.
The symptoms of heart failure can develop quickly (acute heart failure). If this happens, you will need to be treated in hospital. But they can also develop gradually (chronic heart failure).
Read more about the symptoms of heart failure.
Types of heart failure
There are three main types of heart failure. They are:
heart failure caused by left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) – this is because the part of the heart that pumps blood around your body (the left ventricle) becomes weak 
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFPEF) – usually a result of the left ventricle become stiff, causing difficulty filling with blood
heart failure caused by diseased or damaged heart valves
It is important the type of heart failure you have is identified as it will affect the type of treatment you will be offered. A number of tests can be used to help diagnose heart failure.
You should also have blood tests, an electrocardiogram (ECG) and an echocardiogram. These are used to investigate your heart and check how well it is functioning. If you have not had these tests, you should ask your doctor for an explanation.
Read more about how heart failure is diagnosed.
What causes heart failure?
Heart failure does not often have a single cause. A number of problems usually "gang up" on the heart, causing it to fail.
There are a number of health conditions that increase your chances of developing heart failure, including:
high blood pressure (hypertension) – this can put extra strain on the heart, which over time can lead to heart failure
coronary heart disease (CHD) – where the arteries that supply blood to the heart become clogged up by fatty substances (atherosclerosis), and may cause angina or a heart attack
heart muscle weakness (cardiomyopathy) – this can cause heart failure; the reasons for this are often unclear, but it may be genetic in origin, or caused by an infection (usually viral), alcohol misuse, or medication used to treat cancer
heart rhythm disturbance (atrial fibrillation)
heart valve disease, damage or problems with the heart's valves
Sometimes anaemia, an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) or high pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) can also lead to heart failure.
Read more about the causes of heart failure.
Treating heart failure
In most cases, heart failure is a lifelong condition that cannot be cured. Treatment therefore aims to find a combination of measures, including lifestyle changes, medicines, devices or surgery that will improve heart function or help the body get rid of excess water.
A cure may be possible in cases where heart failure has a specific cause. For example, if your heart valves are damaged, it may be possible to replace them, which can cure the condition.
As treatment will usually be lifelong, you and your doctor will need to find a balance of effective treatments that you can manage in the long term so you have the best symptom control and quality of life possible.
Effective treatment for heart failure can have the following benefits:
it helps make the heart stronger
it improves your symptoms
it reduces the risk of a flare-up
it allows people with the condition to live longer and fuller lives
Read more about how heart failure is treated.
Preventing heart failure
Many of the factors that increase your risk of developing heart failure can be managed either by making lifestyle changes or by taking medicines.
For example, in terms of lifestyle factors, you should:
stop smoking (if you smoke)
keep your blood pressure at a healthy level
keep your cholesterol level under control
maintain a healthy weight (neither too fat nor too thin)
eat healthily, including avoiding excess salt in your diet (but severe salt restriction is rarely necessary and is not good for most people); most people should also ensure they have enough iron in their diet (eating red meat or iron supplements can help this)
exercise regularly
limit your alcohol consumption
Read more about preventing heart failure.
Living with heart failure
Being diagnosed with heart failure may come as a shock. While the outlook is related to age, the severity of the heart condition, and any other health problems that may exist, such as lung or kidney disease, anaemia and diabetes, it also depends on what you do to reduce your risk.
Self care means taking responsibility for your own health and wellbeing, with support from the people who are involved in your care.
It is very important that you take any prescribed medication, even after you feel better. Some medicines are designed to protect or heal your heart.
If you do not take them, they cannot help and the underlying problem will get worse. The medicines can prevent or delay your heart problem and stop symptoms getting worse.
Speak to your healthcare team if you have any questions or concerns about the medication you are taking or any potential side effects.
As heart failure is a long-term condition, you will have regular contact with your healthcare team. Developing a good relationship with the members of your team will enable you to discuss your symptoms and any concerns you have. The more the team knows about you, the more they can help you.
Read more about living with heart failure.

An echocardiogram is one of the main methods used to diagnose heart failure 
How common is heart failure?
Heart failure affects about 900,000 people in the UK.
The condition can affect people of all ages, but it is more common in older people – more than half of all people with heart failure are over the age of 75.
Heart failure is associated with a number of other serious health conditions, including coronary heart disease, heart attack and high blood pressure (hypertension).

Flu and the flu vaccine
Your guide to flu symptoms and the flu vaccine, including who should be vaccinated this winter

Life with heart disease
Tips on living with a long-term condition, including healthcare, medicines and support
Page last reviewed: 02/09/2014
Next review due: 02/09/2016
Share:Email shareTwitter shareFacebook shareSave:Google BookmarksNHS Choices Saved PagesPrint:
Ratings
How helpful is this page?
Average rating
1
2
3
4
5
Based on 337 ratings View all ratings
Add your rating

1
2
3
4
5
Please leave your rating
Leave your comment Log in or Register
Share your views and experiences with others.
If you want a response from an NHS professional or the website team, please contact us.
Comments (2) ►









Useful links

NHS Choices links

Atherosclerosis
Atrial fibrillation
Angina
Coronary heart disease
Heart attack
High blood pressure
Stroke
External links

British Heart Foundation: heart health
healthtalk.org: heart failure
HEART UK
heartfailurematters.org
The Somerville Foundation

Heart rhythm problems
An arrhythmia is an irregular heartbeat that can seriously affect quality of life and even cause death. But it's not easy to identify
Find and choose services for Heart failure


Located in 

Looking for other services? View services A-Z
NHS Choices information
Choices e-newsletters
Your pages
Site policies

Terms and conditions
Editorial policy
Comments policy
Syndication
Privacy policy
Cookies policy
Links policy
Personal accounts
Accessibility
Sitemap
Other NHS sites

Choose and Book
Summary Care Records
NHS Scotland
NHS Northern Ireland
NHS Wales
NHS Careers
NHS Jobs
Department of Health
NHS England
About the NHS

The NHS in England
About NHS services
Choice in the NHS
Quality accounts
PROMs
Find authorities and trusts
Healthwatch England
The NHS Constitution
Other channels

Follow us on Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
Video library
Links library
NHS Choices Training
Other Languages

Visit our language section for more health websites in foreign languages.
Contact NHS Choices

Choices helpdesk
Freedom of Information requests
Working for NHS Choices
Request content evidence sources
NHS Direct legacy enquiries
Press enquiries
Link to gov.uk – The new place to find government services and informationThe Information Standard - Certified member