: 17134596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1341. Rev Med Chil. 2006 Aug;134(8):1019-23. Epub 2006 Nov 14.[Ventricular assist device as a bridge to transplant in patients with cardiogenicshock. Preliminary experience in Chile with ABIOMED BVS 5000].[Article in Spanish]Castro P(1), Baraona F, Baeza C, Mc-Nab P, Berlin A, Zalaquett R, Morán S, BeckerP, Irarrázabal M, Garayar B, Carvajal M, Cisternas S.Author information: (1)Departamento Enfermedades Cardiovasculares y Cirugía Cardiaca, HospitalClínico, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.pcastro@med.puc.clHospitalization and death due to heart failure and cardiogenic shock is frequent and currently is increasing among the adult population. Although cardiactransplantation is the most effective treatment in patients with end-stage heart failure, its availability is limited. While waiting for transplantation, somepatients become refractory to treatment and deteriorate progressively. Secondary multi-organ damage could highly compromise the transplant success and also could contraindicate it. Mechanical ventricular assist devices allow reestablishingnormal cardiac output and they have been used as a bridge to recovery andtransplantation. We report four patients that underwent mechanical ventricularsupport using the ABIOMED BVS 5000 system as a bridge for transplantation. Twopatients were connected to biventricular assistance; a third patient wasconnected to a left ventricular support and the fourth to a right ventricularsupport. Three were successfully transplanted and one died of refractorynon-cardiogenic shock. There were no complications related to the support system,such as infection, hemorrhage or stroke. In our experience, the ABIOMED BVS 5000 was an effective strategy as a bridge to heart transplant in patients incardiogenic shock.: 17134596  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1341. rev med chil. 2006 aug;134(8):1019-23. epub 2006 nov 14.[ventricular assist device as a bridge to transplant in patients with cardiogenicshock. preliminary experience in chile with abiomed bvs 5000].[article in spanish]castro p(1), baraona f, baeza c, mc-nab p, berlin a, zalaquett r, morסn s, beckerp, irarrסzabal m, garayar b, carvajal m, cisternas s.author information: (1)departamento enfermedades cardiovasculares y cirug׭a cardiaca, hospitalcl׭nico, pontificia universidad cat׳lica de chile, santiago, chile.pcastro@med.puc.clhospitalization and death due to heart failure and cardiogenic shock is frequent and currently is increasing among the adult population. although cardiactransplantation is the most effective treatment in patients with end-stage heart failure, its availability is limited. while waiting for transplantation, somepatients become refractory to treatment and deteriorate progressively. secondary multi-organ damage could highly compromise the transplant success and also could contraindicate it. mechanical ventricular assist devices allow reestablishingnormal cardiac output and they have been used as a bridge to recovery andtransplantation. we report four patients that underwent mechanical ventricularsupport using the abiomed bvs 5000 system as a bridge for transplantation. twopatients were connected to biventricular assistance; a third patient wasconnected to a left ventricular support and the fourth to a right ventricularsupport. three were successfully transplanted and one died of refractorynon-cardiogenic shock. there were no complications related to the support system,such as infection, hemorrhage or stroke. in our experience, the abiomed bvs 5000 was an effective strategy as a bridge to heart transplant in patients incardiogenic shock.