: 10567305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1834. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999 Oct;68(4):1187-94.Left ventricular assist device bridge-to-transplant network improves survivalafter failed cardiotomy.Helman DN(1), Morales DL, Edwards NM, Mancini DM, Chen JM, Rose EA, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, New York 10032, USA.BACKGROUND: Postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock has been reported to occur following2\% to 6\% of cardiac surgical procedures. Both the mandatory New York statecardiac surgery database and a voluntary ventricular assist device registry have reported hospital discharge rates of only 25\% in postcardiotomy patientssupported with ventricular assist devices. Although many centers have access toshort-term mechanical cardiac assist devices, most lack a dedicated team whichcan resuscitate these critically ill patients. Equally important, these centersdo not have easy access to effective cardiac replacement options, includingimplantable left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) and heart transplantation.METHODS: A referral network based upon the use of implantable LVADs as a bridgeto transplantation in patients with postcardiotomy heart failure was established in the New York City region. Cardiac surgery centers were encouraged to contactour center early following any failed cardiotomy.RESULTS: Forty-four patients entered our postcardiotomy network: 12 recoveredwithout an implantable LVAD, 23 received implantable LVADs, and six expiredwithout long-term LVAD support. Of the 44 referrals, 29 (66\%) survived tohospital discharge. Of the 23 patients receiving implantable LVADs, two recoveredmyocardial function and underwent LVAD explant, 14 were bridged to hearttransplant, one underwent an emergent heart transplant, and six expired. Of the23 implantable LVAD patients, 17 (74\%) survived to hospital discharge.CONCLUSIONS: Regional networks centered around bridge-to-transplant facilitiesthat have an aggressive approach to implantable LVAD placement may substantially improve the survival rate of patients with postcardiotomy heart failure.: 10567305  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1834. ann thorac surg. 1999 oct;68(4):1187-94.left ventricular assist device bridge-to-transplant network improves survivalafter failed cardiotomy.helman dn(1), morales dl, edwards nm, mancini dm, chen jm, rose ea, oz mc.author information: (1)division of cardiothoracic surgery, columbia-presbyterian medical center, new york, new york 10032, usa.background: postcardiotomy cardiogenic shock has been reported to occur following2\% to 6\% of cardiac surgical procedures. both the mandatory new york statecardiac surgery database and a voluntary ventricular assist device registry have reported hospital discharge rates of only 25\% in postcardiotomy patientssupported with ventricular assist devices. although many centers have access toshort-term mechanical cardiac assist devices, most lack a dedicated team whichcan resuscitate these critically ill patients. equally important, these centersdo not have easy access to effective cardiac replacement options, includingimplantable left ventricular assist devices (lvads) and heart transplantation.methods: a referral network based upon the use of implantable lvads as a bridgeto transplantation in patients with postcardiotomy heart failure was established in the new york city region. cardiac surgery centers were encouraged to contactour center early following any failed cardiotomy.results: forty-four patients entered our postcardiotomy network: 12 recoveredwithout an implantable lvad, 23 received implantable lvads, and six expiredwithout long-term lvad support. of the 44 referrals, 29 (66\%) survived tohospital discharge. of the 23 patients receiving implantable lvads, two recoveredmyocardial function and underwent lvad explant, 14 were bridged to hearttransplant, one underwent an emergent heart transplant, and six expired. of the23 implantable lvad patients, 17 (74\%) survived to hospital discharge.conclusions: regional networks centered around bridge-to-transplant facilitiesthat have an aggressive approach to implantable lvad placement may substantially improve the survival rate of patients with postcardiotomy heart failure.