: 2692312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]2122. Artif Organs. 1989 Oct;13(5):480-3.In-vitro evaluation of a valveless cardiac-assist pump.Einav S(1), Elad D, Avidor JM, Stolero D, Hagigat A, Barak J, Vidne BA.Author information: (1)Bio-Medical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Faculty of Engineering, Tel AvivUniversity, Israel.Diseases of the cardiovascular system are a major health-care problem. Nearly 50\%of all deaths are due to cardiovascular disease. A number of cardiovascularpatients experience heart failure, mostly of the left ventricle, and require someform of mechanical support. Cardiac-assist devices are used widely in thetreatment of patients with damaged heart muscle. Cardiac-assist devices have beenintroduced recently to maintain circulation in heart failure patients, until asuitable heart transplant donor is found. Earlier types of left ventricularassist devices were the copulsation and the counterpulsation pumps, whichincreased the efficiency of the vascular system and decreased the workload on thefailed heart. In this study, the authors investigated the performance of avalveless cardiac assist device that can be operated in copulsation,counterpulsation, or any intermediate mode with the left ventricle. The devicehas only one connection to the ascending aorta, no valves, and a commoninlet/outlet. The authors measured the hemodynamic parameters in all modes andhave suggested an optimal mode of operation in a left ventricular heart failuremode.: 2692312  [pubmed - indexed for medline]2122. artif organs. 1989 oct;13(5):480-3.in-vitro evaluation of a valveless cardiac-assist pump.einav s(1), elad d, avidor jm, stolero d, hagigat a, barak j, vidne ba.author information: (1)bio-medical fluid dynamics laboratory, faculty of engineering, tel avivuniversity, israel.diseases of the cardiovascular system are a major health-care problem. nearly 50\%of all deaths are due to cardiovascular disease. a number of cardiovascularpatients experience heart failure, mostly of the left ventricle, and require someform of mechanical support. cardiac-assist devices are used widely in thetreatment of patients with damaged heart muscle. cardiac-assist devices have beenintroduced recently to maintain circulation in heart failure patients, until asuitable heart transplant donor is found. earlier types of left ventricularassist devices were the copulsation and the counterpulsation pumps, whichincreased the efficiency of the vascular system and decreased the workload on thefailed heart. in this study, the authors investigated the performance of avalveless cardiac assist device that can be operated in copulsation,counterpulsation, or any intermediate mode with the left ventricle. the devicehas only one connection to the ascending aorta, no valves, and a commoninlet/outlet. the authors measured the hemodynamic parameters in all modes andhave suggested an optimal mode of operation in a left ventricular heart failuremode.