: 23985102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]362. Artif Organs. 2014 Apr;38(4):276-81. doi: 10.1111/aor.12157. Epub 2013 Aug 27.Refractory heart failure dependent on short-term mechanical circulatory support: what next? Heart transplant or long-term ventricular assist device.Mohite PN(1), Zych B, Banner NR, Simon AR.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Transplantation & Mechanical Support, RoyalBrompton & Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.Chronic heart failure is a progressive and eventually fatal illness. Although thedisease cannot be cured and treatment is symptom oriented, most of the patientsbenefit from optimum medical treatment. Patients with rapid deterioration inchronic advanced heart failure refractory to medical treatment need inotropicsupport and may need intra-aortic balloon pump to maintain circulatory support,which of course cannot be prolonged beyond a certain limit. The outcome of heart transplant and long-term ventricular assist device (VAD) in such patients ispoor. The short-term mechanical circulatory support (MCS) offered to suchpatients not only provides effective circulatory support and stabilizes themhemodynamically, but also halts the ensuing or reverts the established end-organ failure. As the name suggests, the short-term MCS offers support for the shortterm, usually less than a month. Although some patients with acute heart failure experience recovery of myocardial function with short-term MCS support, othersbecome dependent. These patients, stabilized and \"stuck\" with short-term MCS, canbe \"rescued\" with long-term VAD or heart transplantation. Both the procedures,when done in this special situation, have their inherent advantages,disadvantages, and complications and hence need the careful consideration aboutthe choice of the procedure. We have tried to elucidate this situation byconsidering the advantages and disadvantages of both options.Â© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and International Center for Artificial Organs andTransplantation.: 23985102  [pubmed - indexed for medline]362. artif organs. 2014 apr;38(4):276-81. doi: 10.1111/aor.12157. epub 2013 aug 27.refractory heart failure dependent on short-term mechanical circulatory support: what next? heart transplant or long-term ventricular assist device.mohite pn(1), zych b, banner nr, simon ar.author information: (1)department of cardiothoracic transplantation & mechanical support, royalbrompton & harefield nhs foundation trust, london, uk.chronic heart failure is a progressive and eventually fatal illness. although thedisease cannot be cured and treatment is symptom oriented, most of the patientsbenefit from optimum medical treatment. patients with rapid deterioration inchronic advanced heart failure refractory to medical treatment need inotropicsupport and may need intra-aortic balloon pump to maintain circulatory support,which of course cannot be prolonged beyond a certain limit. the outcome of heart transplant and long-term ventricular assist device (vad) in such patients ispoor. the short-term mechanical circulatory support (mcs) offered to suchpatients not only provides effective circulatory support and stabilizes themhemodynamically, but also halts the ensuing or reverts the established end-organ failure. as the name suggests, the short-term mcs offers support for the shortterm, usually less than a month. although some patients with acute heart failure experience recovery of myocardial function with short-term mcs support, othersbecome dependent. these patients, stabilized and \"stuck\" with short-term mcs, canbe \"rescued\" with long-term vad or heart transplantation. both the procedures,when done in this special situation, have their inherent advantages,disadvantages, and complications and hence need the careful consideration aboutthe choice of the procedure. we have tried to elucidate this situation byconsidering the advantages and disadvantages of both options.â© 2013 wiley periodicals, inc. and international center for artificial organs andtransplantation.