: 25577562  [PubMed - in process]53. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2014;2014:290-3. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2014.6943586.Application of a search algorithm using stochastic behaviors to autonomouscontrol of a ventricular assist device.Ohnuma K, Sumikura H, Homma A, Tsukiya T, Mizuno T, Takewa Y, Tatsumi E.A ventricular assist device (VAD) is a device with mechanical pumps implantedadjacent to the patient\s native heart to support the blood flow. Mechanicalcirculatory support using VADs has been an essential therapeutic tool forpatients with severe heart failure waiting for a heart transplant in clinicalsite. Adaptive control of VADs that automatically adjust the pump output withchanges in a patient state is one of the important approaches for enhancedtherapeutic efficacy, prevention of complications and quality of lifeimprovement. However adaptively controlling a VAD in the realistic situationwould be difficult because it is necessary to model the whole including the VADand the cardiovascular dynamics. To solve this problem, we propose an applicationof attractor selection algorithm using stochastic behavior to a VAD controlsystem. In this study, we sought to investigate whether this proposed method can be used to adaptively control of a VAD in the simple case of a continuous flowVAD. The flow rate control algorithm was constructed on the basis of astochastically searching algorithm as one example of application. The validity ofthe constructed control algorithm was examined in a mock circuit. As a result, inresponse to a low-flow state with the different causes, the flow rate of the pumpreached a target value with self adaptive behavior without designing the detailedcontrol rule based on the experience or the model of the control target.: 25577562  [pubmed - in process]53. conf proc ieee eng med biol soc. 2014;2014:290-3. doi: 10.1109/embc.2014.6943586.application of a search algorithm using stochastic behaviors to autonomouscontrol of a ventricular assist device.ohnuma k, sumikura h, homma a, tsukiya t, mizuno t, takewa y, tatsumi e.a ventricular assist device (vad) is a device with mechanical pumps implantedadjacent to the patient\s native heart to support the blood flow. mechanicalcirculatory support using vads has been an essential therapeutic tool forpatients with severe heart failure waiting for a heart transplant in clinicalsite. adaptive control of vads that automatically adjust the pump output withchanges in a patient state is one of the important approaches for enhancedtherapeutic efficacy, prevention of complications and quality of lifeimprovement. however adaptively controlling a vad in the realistic situationwould be difficult because it is necessary to model the whole including the vadand the cardiovascular dynamics. to solve this problem, we propose an applicationof attractor selection algorithm using stochastic behavior to a vad controlsystem. in this study, we sought to investigate whether this proposed method can be used to adaptively control of a vad in the simple case of a continuous flowvad. the flow rate control algorithm was constructed on the basis of astochastically searching algorithm as one example of application. the validity ofthe constructed control algorithm was examined in a mock circuit. as a result, inresponse to a low-flow state with the different causes, the flow rate of the pumpreached a target value with self adaptive behavior without designing the detailedcontrol rule based on the experience or the model of the control target.