: 23731606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]432. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2014 Feb;45(2):372-6. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezt281. Epub2013 May 31.Heterotopic heart transplant: is there an indication in the continuous flowventricular assist device era?Marasco SF(1), Bell D, Lee G, Bailey M, Bergin P, Esmore DS.Author information: (1)Cardiothoracic Surgery Unit, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.OBJECTIVES: Heterotopic heart transplantation (HHTx) is a therapeutic option inheart failure patients with fixed elevated pulmonary hypertension. However,survival is poorer in HHTx recipients, and with improving results in continuousflow ventricular assist devices (VADs), many patients can be bridged to allownormalization of pulmonary artery pressures, making them orthotopic hearttransplant (OHTx) candidates. Thus, the aim of this study was to analyse thesurvival of our HHTx cohort and compare them with our VAD bridge patients.METHODS: A retrospective review of 342 heart transplant patients (315 OHTx and 27HHTx) performed at our institution over 15 years was compared with 124bridge-to-transplant VAD patients over the same time period, of whom 69 received an OHTx. Pulmonary artery pressures before and after VAD implant were analysed.Survival was analysed using both univariate and multivariate analyses.RESULTS: HHTx recipients were significantly older, and the donor allografts were older, smaller and had longer ischaemic times than the OHTx cohort. Comparison ofthe VAD types implanted (pulsatile vs continuous) showed significantly longertime supported on the continuous devices with significantly fewer deaths than thepulsatile devices. The continuous devices were successful in reducing pulmonaryartery pressures pretransplant. The HHTx cohort had a significantly poorersurvival than the OHTx cohort (P=0.002). Survival on a continuous device and thenOHTx was significantly better than either HHTx or pulsatile device support.CONCLUSIONS: The main indication for HHTx, namely fixed elevated pulmonaryhypertension in heart failure patients, can be safely and effectively treated by continuous flow bridge to transplant with superior survival.: 23731606  [pubmed - indexed for medline]432. eur j cardiothorac surg. 2014 feb;45(2):372-6. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezt281. epub2013 may 31.heterotopic heart transplant: is there an indication in the continuous flowventricular assist device era?marasco sf(1), bell d, lee g, bailey m, bergin p, esmore ds.author information: (1)cardiothoracic surgery unit, the alfred hospital, melbourne, australia.objectives: heterotopic heart transplantation (hhtx) is a therapeutic option inheart failure patients with fixed elevated pulmonary hypertension. however,survival is poorer in hhtx recipients, and with improving results in continuousflow ventricular assist devices (vads), many patients can be bridged to allownormalization of pulmonary artery pressures, making them orthotopic hearttransplant (ohtx) candidates. thus, the aim of this study was to analyse thesurvival of our hhtx cohort and compare them with our vad bridge patients.methods: a retrospective review of 342 heart transplant patients (315 ohtx and 27hhtx) performed at our institution over 15 years was compared with 124bridge-to-transplant vad patients over the same time period, of whom 69 received an ohtx. pulmonary artery pressures before and after vad implant were analysed.survival was analysed using both univariate and multivariate analyses.results: hhtx recipients were significantly older, and the donor allografts were older, smaller and had longer ischaemic times than the ohtx cohort. comparison ofthe vad types implanted (pulsatile vs continuous) showed significantly longertime supported on the continuous devices with significantly fewer deaths than thepulsatile devices. the continuous devices were successful in reducing pulmonaryartery pressures pretransplant. the hhtx cohort had a significantly poorersurvival than the ohtx cohort (p=0.002). survival on a continuous device and thenohtx was significantly better than either hhtx or pulsatile device support.conclusions: the main indication for hhtx, namely fixed elevated pulmonaryhypertension in heart failure patients, can be safely and effectively treated by continuous flow bridge to transplant with superior survival.