: 22571882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]631. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013 Feb;43(2):379-82. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezs242. Epub2012 May 7.Rapid onset of fulminant myocarditis portends a favourable prognosis and theability to bridge mechanical circulatory support to recovery.Atluri P(1), Ullery BW, MacArthur JW, Goldstone AB, Fairman AS, Hiesinger W,Acker MA, Woo YJ.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.OBJECTIVES: Fulminant myocarditis with cardiogenic shock is fatal withoutmechanical circulatory support. Once haemodynamic stability has been established with a ventricular assist device (VAD), the decision to wait for myocardialrecovery as opposed to listing for an orthotopic heart transplant (OHT) can bedifficult. We have undertaken this study to establish the criteria fordetermining the need for heart transplantation following VAD implant forfulminant myocarditis.METHODS: A total of 442 VADs were implanted between 1993 and 2011. Twenty-fourVADs were implanted for fulminant myocarditis with refractory cardiogenic shock. We retrospectively analysed the variables and the pathology for this cohort.Patients who had a full recovery of myocardial function and subsequent VADexplant (Explant) were compared with those bridged to OHT. There was one acutedeath.RESULTS: There was no difference in the past medical history between the groups. Explant patients had a more acute onset of heart failure with a median of 7 days between the onset of symptoms and VAD implant, when compared with 22 days for OHT(P = 0.01). A rapid recovery in myocardial function was seen in the Explantgroup, with recovery of myocardial function (ejection fraction = 53 Â± 24\%) in 14 Â± 7 days. Myocardial function was sustained for 5 years following the VADexplant. The female gender favoured myocardial recovery and VAD explantability.Two patients had giant cell myocarditis, neither of whom had a recovery offunction, and they were bridged to heart transplant with a VAD.CONCLUSIONS: Fulminant myocarditis is a fatal condition without mechanicalsupport. The rapid onset of symptoms is associated with a complete recovery ofmyocardial function and VAD explant. The absence of rapid recovery of myocardial function should prompt listing for a heart transplant.: 22571882  [pubmed - indexed for medline]631. eur j cardiothorac surg. 2013 feb;43(2):379-82. doi: 10.1093/ejcts/ezs242. epub2012 may 7.rapid onset of fulminant myocarditis portends a favourable prognosis and theability to bridge mechanical circulatory support to recovery.atluri p(1), ullery bw, macarthur jw, goldstone ab, fairman as, hiesinger w,acker ma, woo yj.author information: (1)division of cardiovascular surgery, department of surgery, perelman school of medicine, university of pennsylvania, philadelphia, pa 19104, usa.objectives: fulminant myocarditis with cardiogenic shock is fatal withoutmechanical circulatory support. once haemodynamic stability has been established with a ventricular assist device (vad), the decision to wait for myocardialrecovery as opposed to listing for an orthotopic heart transplant (oht) can bedifficult. we have undertaken this study to establish the criteria fordetermining the need for heart transplantation following vad implant forfulminant myocarditis.methods: a total of 442 vads were implanted between 1993 and 2011. twenty-fourvads were implanted for fulminant myocarditis with refractory cardiogenic shock. we retrospectively analysed the variables and the pathology for this cohort.patients who had a full recovery of myocardial function and subsequent vadexplant (explant) were compared with those bridged to oht. there was one acutedeath.results: there was no difference in the past medical history between the groups. explant patients had a more acute onset of heart failure with a median of 7 days between the onset of symptoms and vad implant, when compared with 22 days for oht(p = 0.01). a rapid recovery in myocardial function was seen in the explantgroup, with recovery of myocardial function (ejection fraction = 53 â± 24\%) in 14 â± 7 days. myocardial function was sustained for 5 years following the vadexplant. the female gender favoured myocardial recovery and vad explantability.two patients had giant cell myocarditis, neither of whom had a recovery offunction, and they were bridged to heart transplant with a vad.conclusions: fulminant myocarditis is a fatal condition without mechanicalsupport. the rapid onset of symptoms is associated with a complete recovery ofmyocardial function and vad explant. the absence of rapid recovery of myocardial function should prompt listing for a heart transplant.