: 22537027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]642. Nutr Clin Pract. 2012 Jun;27(3):352-62. doi: 10.1177/0884533612444537. Epub 2012 Apr 20.Nutrition assessment, care, and considerations of ventricular assist devicepatients.Montgomery TD(1), Cohen AE, Garnick J, Spadafore J, Boldea E.Author information: (1)Mayo Clinic Hospital, Phoenix, AZ 85054, USA. montgomery.triciadawn@mayo.eduA ventricular assist device (VAD) is an implantable mechanical device that isused to partially or completely replace the circulatory function of a failingheart. VADs may serve as a bridge to heart transplantation or as permanentcirculatory assistance, also referred to as destination therapy. There is apaucity of information regarding the nutrition complications in VAD patients, andas such, little is presently known of the optimal means of nutrition assessmentand management of these complex and often critically ill patients. In thisreview, a general overview of the VAD, comparisons of nutrition assessmentmeasures, and strategies to meet the nutrition needs of these patients areprovided using evidence-based information wherever possible. Because there is alack of nutrition studies and assessment guidelines specifically for VADpatients, many of the guidelines for care of these patients are currently basedon the information available for the care of patients with heart failure.Although the optimal measure to assess nutrition status remains poorly studied, asystematic, thorough nutrition assessment of patients with heart failure andheart transplant candidates prior to VAD placement appears to be important toidentify those at nutrition risk and, with appropriate nutrition therapy,decrease their risk for morbidity and mortality. VAD patients with inadequateoral intake may require nutrition support to meet their nutrition needs; however,feeding the hemodynamically compromised patient provides additional challenges.: 22537027  [pubmed - indexed for medline]642. nutr clin pract. 2012 jun;27(3):352-62. doi: 10.1177/0884533612444537. epub 2012 apr 20.nutrition assessment, care, and considerations of ventricular assist devicepatients.montgomery td(1), cohen ae, garnick j, spadafore j, boldea e.author information: (1)mayo clinic hospital, phoenix, az 85054, usa. montgomery.triciadawn@mayo.edua ventricular assist device (vad) is an implantable mechanical device that isused to partially or completely replace the circulatory function of a failingheart. vads may serve as a bridge to heart transplantation or as permanentcirculatory assistance, also referred to as destination therapy. there is apaucity of information regarding the nutrition complications in vad patients, andas such, little is presently known of the optimal means of nutrition assessmentand management of these complex and often critically ill patients. in thisreview, a general overview of the vad, comparisons of nutrition assessmentmeasures, and strategies to meet the nutrition needs of these patients areprovided using evidence-based information wherever possible. because there is alack of nutrition studies and assessment guidelines specifically for vadpatients, many of the guidelines for care of these patients are currently basedon the information available for the care of patients with heart failure.although the optimal measure to assess nutrition status remains poorly studied, asystematic, thorough nutrition assessment of patients with heart failure andheart transplant candidates prior to vad placement appears to be important toidentify those at nutrition risk and, with appropriate nutrition therapy,decrease their risk for morbidity and mortality. vad patients with inadequateoral intake may require nutrition support to meet their nutrition needs; however,feeding the hemodynamically compromised patient provides additional challenges.