: 25234764  [PubMed - in process]112. Exp Clin Transplant. 2014 Sep 17. doi: 10.6002/ect.2014.0043. [Epub ahead ofprint]Implanting a Nonpulsatile Axial Flow Left Ventricular Assist Device as a Bridgeto Transplant for Systemic Ventricular Failure After A Mustard Procedure.Dakkak AR(1), Sindermann JR, Dell\Aquila AM, Welp HA, Martens S, Scherer M.Author information: (1)From the Cardiothoracic Surgery, University Hospital of Muenster,Albert-Schweitzer Campus 1, Gebaeude: A1, 48149 Muenster, Germany.Right (systemic) ventricular failure is well described after a Mustard procedure for transposition of the great arteries. Sixty-one percent of patients have been reported to show moderate-to-severe dysfunction of the systemic ventricle, 25years after repair of transposition of the great arteries by a Mustard procedure.In such cases, heart transplant often seems to be the only option. When severeheart failure with hemodynamic instability develops, the only way to bridge thesepatients to a transplant is implantation of a mechanical circulatory supportsystem. Because of the special anatomic features of the right ventricle, theimplantation procedure can be challenging. Here, we report the case of a patient who underwent a left ventricular assist device implant owing to severe heartfailure, 36 years after undergoing a Mustard procedure.: 25234764  [pubmed - in process]112. exp clin transplant. 2014 sep 17. doi: 10.6002/ect.2014.0043. [epub ahead ofprint]implanting a nonpulsatile axial flow left ventricular assist device as a bridgeto transplant for systemic ventricular failure after a mustard procedure.dakkak ar(1), sindermann jr, dell\aquila am, welp ha, martens s, scherer m.author information: (1)from the cardiothoracic surgery, university hospital of muenster,albert-schweitzer campus 1, gebaeude: a1, 48149 muenster, germany.right (systemic) ventricular failure is well described after a mustard procedure for transposition of the great arteries. sixty-one percent of patients have been reported to show moderate-to-severe dysfunction of the systemic ventricle, 25years after repair of transposition of the great arteries by a mustard procedure.in such cases, heart transplant often seems to be the only option. when severeheart failure with hemodynamic instability develops, the only way to bridge thesepatients to a transplant is implantation of a mechanical circulatory supportsystem. because of the special anatomic features of the right ventricle, theimplantation procedure can be challenging. here, we report the case of a patient who underwent a left ventricular assist device implant owing to severe heartfailure, 36 years after undergoing a mustard procedure.