: 22723614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]616. Nihon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 2012 May;113(3):292-6.[End-stage heart failure].[Article in Japanese]Kyo S(1).Author information: (1)Department of Therapeutic Strategy for Heart Failure, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.The ultimate treatment for end-stage heart failure patients is cardiactransplantation. However, many Japanese candidates have not received its benefitsdue to the extreme scarcity of donor hearts. The heart transplant waiting period in Japan is prolonged, particularly after the revision of the OrganTransplantation Law in 2010 which meant that patients must wait more than 900days because of the increase in candidates. According to the Japanese Transplant Registry, almost 90\% of candidates require bridge transplantation therapy (BTT)with a ventricular assist device (VAD), and the average duration of BTT is around800 to 900 days. The excellent outcome of heart transplant surgery in Japan even with such a prolonged BTT duration with VADs is confirmation of the excellentclinical results of VAD support. Until April 2011, only the paracorporeal NiproVAD for BTT was covered by Japanese national health insurance. Analysis of theclinical outcome of 303 patients who received a Nipro VAD (for left ventricular[LV] drainage) as BTT showed that the longest support duration was 1,673 days(average 427 days), 72 patients (24\%) received a heart transplant, and 68patients (22\%) required ongoing VAD support. Thus the Nipro VAD is an excellentparacorporeal device. The 6-year survival rate of 36 patients in clinical trials of four types of implantable rotary blood pump LVADs (Evaheart, DuraHeart, Jarvik200, HeartMate II) was about 70\%, which is an outstanding result of BTT usingimplantable LVADs. Only 36 patients in seven Japanese heart centers have receivedimplantable LVADs, and this small number corresponds to the initial learningcurve. Therefore, the clinical results will improve greatly after the use ofcommercially available implantable LVADs becomes more widespread. The longwaiting period for heart transplantation has contributed to the excellentclinical outcomes of VAD therapy in Japan.: 22723614  [pubmed - indexed for medline]616. nihon geka gakkai zasshi. 2012 may;113(3):292-6.[end-stage heart failure].[article in japanese]kyo s(1).author information: (1)department of therapeutic strategy for heart failure, the university of tokyo hospital, tokyo, japan.the ultimate treatment for end-stage heart failure patients is cardiactransplantation. however, many japanese candidates have not received its benefitsdue to the extreme scarcity of donor hearts. the heart transplant waiting period in japan is prolonged, particularly after the revision of the organtransplantation law in 2010 which meant that patients must wait more than 900days because of the increase in candidates. according to the japanese transplant registry, almost 90\% of candidates require bridge transplantation therapy (btt)with a ventricular assist device (vad), and the average duration of btt is around800 to 900 days. the excellent outcome of heart transplant surgery in japan even with such a prolonged btt duration with vads is confirmation of the excellentclinical results of vad support. until april 2011, only the paracorporeal niprovad for btt was covered by japanese national health insurance. analysis of theclinical outcome of 303 patients who received a nipro vad (for left ventricular[lv] drainage) as btt showed that the longest support duration was 1,673 days(average 427 days), 72 patients (24\%) received a heart transplant, and 68patients (22\%) required ongoing vad support. thus the nipro vad is an excellentparacorporeal device. the 6-year survival rate of 36 patients in clinical trials of four types of implantable rotary blood pump lvads (evaheart, duraheart, jarvik200, heartmate ii) was about 70\%, which is an outstanding result of btt usingimplantable lvads. only 36 patients in seven japanese heart centers have receivedimplantable lvads, and this small number corresponds to the initial learningcurve. therefore, the clinical results will improve greatly after the use ofcommercially available implantable lvads becomes more widespread. the longwaiting period for heart transplantation has contributed to the excellentclinical outcomes of vad therapy in japan.