: 20642764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]931. Prog Transplant. 2010 Jun;20(2):134-41.Ventricular assist device: saving the failing heart.Kurien S(1), Gallagher C.Author information: (1)Center for Heart Transplant & Assist Devices, Advocate Christ Medical Center, Oaklawn, IL 60453, USA. sudha.kurien@advocatehealth.comBACKGROUND: Improving the survival and quality of life of patients with end-stageheart failure is the primary goal of using a ventricular assist device, generallyknown as mechanical circulatory support. Ventricular assist devices are apractical long-term surgical option for a select group of patients with end-stageheart failure.METHOD: A case study is used to demonstrate the process of selection andevaluation of patients with end-stage heart failure for ventricular assist devicetherapy. Also, a detailed description of all aspects of care of patients before, during, and after implantation of a ventricular assist device is presented.CONCLUSION: A ventricular assist device is a superior therapeutic option forpatients with end-stage heart failure who have become intolerant to medicaltherapy or in whom medical therapy has been unsuccessful. Advances in devicetechnology through the development of nonpulsatile continuous flow devices areshowing favorable long-term outcomes for patients with a ventricular assistdevice by minimizing complications and enhancing quality of life.: 20642764  [pubmed - indexed for medline]931. prog transplant. 2010 jun;20(2):134-41.ventricular assist device: saving the failing heart.kurien s(1), gallagher c.author information: (1)center for heart transplant & assist devices, advocate christ medical center, oaklawn, il 60453, usa. sudha.kurien@advocatehealth.combackground: improving the survival and quality of life of patients with end-stageheart failure is the primary goal of using a ventricular assist device, generallyknown as mechanical circulatory support. ventricular assist devices are apractical long-term surgical option for a select group of patients with end-stageheart failure.method: a case study is used to demonstrate the process of selection andevaluation of patients with end-stage heart failure for ventricular assist devicetherapy. also, a detailed description of all aspects of care of patients before, during, and after implantation of a ventricular assist device is presented.conclusion: a ventricular assist device is a superior therapeutic option forpatients with end-stage heart failure who have become intolerant to medicaltherapy or in whom medical therapy has been unsuccessful. advances in devicetechnology through the development of nonpulsatile continuous flow devices areshowing favorable long-term outcomes for patients with a ventricular assistdevice by minimizing complications and enhancing quality of life.