Close
Share on Facebook
Twitter
Google+
Email
MyHealth
For Patients & Visitors
For Health Care ProfessionalsSearch
Stanford Health Care (SHC) (formerly Stanford Hospital & Clinics)
Heart Transplant Program
ABOUT OUR DOCTORSCARE & TREATMENTCLINICAL TRIALSFOR PATIENTS
CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH
Pioneers in Heart Transplantation
The Stanford Heart Transplant Program has the accumulated wisdom of more than fifty years of research and patient care experience.

Our doctors and scientists work, collaboratively, to develop many innovations and continue to advance new techniques in transplant surgery.
Clinic image
MAPS & DIRECTIONS
300 Pasteur Drive
2nd Floor, Room A260
Stanford, CA 94305 
Phone: 650-723-5468
Getting Here »
MAKE AN APPOINTMENT
usnews-card
Our Doctors
Edward Kilbane
Psychiatrist

Michael Pham, M.D., M.P.H.
Cardiologist

Richard-Tien Ha
Heart and lung transplant surgeon
Gerald Berry
Pathologist

Euan A. Ashley
Cardiologist

Jose G. Montoya
Infectious disease doctor

Jose R. Maldonado, MD, FAPM
Psychiatrist
21
Doctors
View All »
Care and Treatment
Expertise
Treatments
Conditions Treated
Your Care Team
Programs and Services
Quality and Outcomes
Research
Glossary
Resources
Volunteer
Donor Awareness
Donate
Heart Transplant Timeline
Loss and Grief
An International Reputation for Cardiac Excellence
Stanford is recognized worldwide as a pioneering center for heart transplants. Dr. Norman Shumway and his colleagues developed the experimental basis for transplants in their early work, which then paved the way for the first adult heart transplant in the U.S. at Stanford in 1968. To date, our medical teams have performed more than 1,200 heart transplants.

Our multidisciplinary program includes:

Specialists in heart failure management and heart transplantation
Experts in cardiothoracic surgery
State-of-the-art diagnostic tests from radiologists, molecular biologists and pathologists
Access to new clinical trials in heart failure and heart transplantation
Innovations introduced in the transplant field from Stanford include:

The operative method for heart transplantation
The use of percutaneous, transvenous biopsy of the heart to detect rejection
The use of new immunosuppressive drugs, including cyclosporine, to prevent rejection
The first successful heart-lung transplantation procedure
The first successful use of a mechanical device or left ventricular assist device (LVAD) as a bridge-to-heart transplantation
The development of intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) to detect early evidence of transplant coronary artery disease
The use of peripheral blood gene expression testing to identify patients at low risk for rejection, allowing doctors to safely decrease the number of biopsies performed
Approximately 40 to 50 patients undergo heart transplantation each year at Stanford. The procedures are performed in patients from newborns to adults over 60 years of age. Almost every type of end-stage heart disease has been treated here, and the Stanford team remains a leader in introducing new concepts and treatments to improve outcomes for transplant patients.

STANFORD HEALTH NOW

FEATURES

 
Is Your Heart At Risk? Infographic
Do you know if you're at risk for heart disease? How healthy is your heart? In recognition of American Heart Month this February, stay heart healthy and celebrate your heart with us.

OUR PATIENTS

Heart Transplant Gives Local Father New Lease on Life
Jason Pablo’s quality of life had greatly deteriorated due to heart disease. A heart transplant has made an active lifestyle with his young family possible.

Clinical Trials

Clinical trials are research studies that evaluate a new medical approach, device, drug, or other treatment. As a Stanford Health Care patient, you may have access to the latest, advanced clinical trials.

Open trials refer to studies currently accepting participants. Closed trials are not currently enrolling, but may open in the future.
OPEN TRIALSCLOSED TRIALS
Genome Transplant Dynamics: Non-invasive Sequencing-based Diagnosis of Rejection
Inhaled Nitric Oxide and Inhaled Prostacyclin After Cardiac Surgery for Heart Transplant or LVAD Placement
Heart Failure
Prevention of Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy Using Rituximab (Rituxan) Therapy in Cardiac Transplantation
For Patients
Your doctor may request an evaluation by a heart failure specialist, who will review your medical records and determine if additional tests are necessary.
Patients being considered for a heart transplant will be referred to the Cardiomyopathy Center. 
Self-referrals are accepted.
PREPARE FOR YOUR APPOINTMENT

Bring results from prior lab tests, if requested.
AFTER YOUR APPOINTMENT

Reach a transplant nurse coordinator at 650-498-9909.
ABOUT A HEART TRANSPLANT
Learn more about what to expect during the different stages of a heart transplant.
International Patients
Phone: +1 1-650-723-8561
Email: IMS@stanfordmed.org
Call us to make an appointment
650-723-5468
RESOURCES

Location and parking
Billing and insurance
FIND A DOCTOR
FIND CONDITIONS & TREATMENTS
FIND A STANFORD CLINIC
FOR PATIENTS & VISITORS
Billing & Insurance
Your Hospital Stay
VOLUNTEERING
MAKE A GIFT
ABOUT US
STANFORD HEALTH NOW
FOR HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
Referring Physicians
Nursing
Allied Healthcare Professionals
CAREERS
NEWSROOM
UNIVERSITY HEALTHCARE ALLIANCE
Affinity Medical Partners Medical Group
Bay Valley Medical Group
Cardiovascular Consultants Medical Group
Menlo Medical Clinic
University Medical Group
Stanford Medicine
Stanford Children's Health
Stanford University
Legal Privacy Code of Conduct ©2015 Stanford Health Care. All Rights Reserved

MyChildren's Patient PortalInternational Resources

Patient Resources
Clinician Resources
Centers + Services
Research + Innovation
Conditions + Treatments
Ways to Help
Heart Transplant Program
Home > Centers + Services > Programs and Services > Heart Transplant Program Overview
Find A DoctorRequest An Appointment
Overview
Meet our Team
Your Visit
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
Research and Innovations	+
Patient Resources	+
Clinician Resources
Contact Us
Find Us
Conditions and Treatments

HEART CENTER AT BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

Today it's been 5 years since my son Matthew's A.V. Canal repair. I remember the nurses: Shannon, Jaime, and Patrick....They were so good with Matthew and with my husband and I. 
Read More



HEART CENTER AT BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

If it wasn't for Children's Hospital and the Cardiac wing he wouldn't be here. Thank you all for what you have done for us and giving him a chance to grow in front of our eyes! Thank you Dr. Mah, Dr. Baird, and Dr. de Ferranti we owe you the world. 
Read More



HEART CENTER AT BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

5 years ago today, I placed my one week old son in Dr. Emani's hands to repair his COA. I remember it like it was yesterday, and I'm thankful every day for the care we received at the Heart Center at Boston Children's Hospital. 
Read More



HEART CENTER AT BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

1 year ago today Dr Baird performed open heart surgery on Cayman. It did NOT slow him down. Today his heart is as good as new and he barely even has a scar. Thank you Dr Baird and everyone on the cardiac floor at Boston Children's Hospital. 
Read More



HEART CENTER AT BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

Two years ago today we were at Boston Children's Hospital and our daughter, Emily, was having an aortic stent placed. We were told it would have to be replaced by the time she turned 2 (which was last June) but its still in place and working beautifully. We thank God every day for the amazing work of Dr. Gerald Marx and Dr. James Lock. 
Read More



HEART CENTER AT BOSTON CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL

This weekend we celebrated our beautiful daughter, Mikayla's 1st birthday and that’s thanks to the amazing surgeons and staff on the 8th floor!! Mikayla was born with a rare diagnosis of Pentalogy of Cantrell which included several heart defects. 
Read More


123456
US News Best Children's Hospital Cardiology
Boston Children's Hospital's Heart Center named #1 in Cardiology and Heart Surgery every year that U.S.News & World Report has ranked the nation's top pediatric hospitals by specialty.
Related Clinical Services
Heart Center
Pediatric Transplant Center
Department of Cardiac Surgery
Heart Transplant Program Overview

LIke ThisLIke ThisLIke ThisLIke ThisLIke This
0
Contact the Heart Transplant Program
617-355-6329
International: +1-617-355-6329
transplant@childrens.harvard.edu
At the Heart Transplant Program at Boston Children’s Hospital, we evaluate infants, children and adolescents who are potential candidates for heart transplantations. Comprised of clinicians from both the Pediatric Transplant Center and the hospital's #1 ranked Heart Center, we specialize in caring for children with end-stage heart disease. Since the Heart Transplant Program’s inception in 1986, we have performed more than 260 heart transplants.


Betsy Blume, MD – Medical Director, Heart Transplant Program
Pediatric Heart Transplant Program highlights
Ranked No. 1 in the country by U.S.News & World Report

Close collaboration with the Interventional Catheterization Program

A leader in research and regulatory issues surrounding ventricular assist devices used in the United States

Our expertise
The Heart Transplant Program at Children’s Hospital Boston is one of the largest pediatric heart transplant centers in the country. Our multidisciplinary team is made up of:

cardiac surgeonsHeart Transplant Staff
cardiac anesthesiologists
cardiologists
advanced practice nurses
physical therapists
cardiac pathologists
infectious disease specialists
nutritionists
transplant pharmacists
transplant coordinators
psychologists
social workers
child life specialists

Francis Fynn-Thompson, MD – Surgical Director, Heart & Lung Transplant
Together, we are dedicated to caring for some of the most acute cardiac patients in the country.

More than 60 percent of heart transplant evaluations are for patients with complex congenital heart disease.
The remainder of the patients evaluated for transplant have a diagnosis of cardiomyopathy that has failed maximal medical management.
Our program makes frequency use of Boston Children’s advanced cardiac catheterization lab. Here, we can visualize what’s happening in the heart in fine detail, and take measurements of blood pressure and flow. Our colleagues specializing in interventional cardiology can even make a number of repairs with catheterization, like expanding narrowed passages and closing holes.

Did you know?
Mechanical circulatory support with VADs

Boston Children’s physicians and nurses have played a leading role in the research and regulatory issues surrounding pediatric ventricular assist device (VAD) use in the United States. These devices give blood circulation a boost and can serve as a life-saving bridge to transplant. Boston Children’s cardiologists were integral in designing and conducting the multi-institutional study of the Berlin Heart®, which gained FDA approval for use in children in 2011. Boston Children’s continues to expand the field of VAD support in children by introducing new devices such as the HeartWare® HVAD allowing children to be discharged home and to resume activities of life. A Boston Children’s patient was the first child in North America to go back to school with a VAD as she waits for a heart transplant. Learn more.

Danielle
Heart transplant patient, Danielle, age 15, six years post-transplant

Harvard Medical School Teaching Hospital	“The future of pediatrics will be forged by thinking differently, breaking paradigms and joining together in a shared vision of tackling the toughest challenges before us.” - Sandra L. Fenwick, President and CEO
About Boston Children's Hospital
About Us
Giving to Boston Children's
Newsroom
Public Policy
Quality and Patient Safety
Research + Innovation
Videos
Boston Children's Hospital 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115 617-355-6000 | 800-355-7944
How Can We Help You?
International Resources
Find a Doctor
Clinical Services
Conditions + Treatments
Locations
Career Opportunities
Contact Us
Legal
Privacy Practices
Patient + Family Rights
Terms of Use
© 2005-2015 All Rights Reserved
Boston Children's Hospital top pediatric hospital 
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
LinkedIn
Google+
Instagram
