- 24280231OWN - NLMSTAT- MEDLINEDA  - 20131127DCOM- 20140811IS  - 2046-4924 (Electronic)IS  - 1366-5278 (Linking)VI  - 17IP  - 53DP  - 2013 NovTI  - Clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation      left ventricular assist devices as either bridge to transplant or alternative to       transplant for adults eligible for heart transplantation: systematic review and      cost-effectiveness model.PG  - 1-499, v-viLID - 10.3310/hta17530 [doi]AB  - BACKGROUND: Advanced heart failure (HF) is a debilitating condition for which      heart transplant (HT) offers the best treatment option. However, the supply of      donor hearts is diminishing and demand greatly exceeds supply. Ventricular assist      devices (VADs) are surgically implanted pumps used as an alternative to      transplant (ATT) or as a bridge to transplant (BTT) while a patient awaits a      donor heart. Surgery and VADs are costly. For the NHS to allocate and deliver      such services in a cost-effective way the relative costs and benefits of these      alternative treatments need to be estimated. OBJECTIVES: To investigate for      patients aged >/= 16 years with advanced HF eligible for HT: (1) the clinical      effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation VADs used as      BTT compared with medical management (MM); and (2) the clinical effectiveness and      cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation VADs used as an ATT in      comparison with their use as BTT therapy. DATA SOURCES: Searches for clinical      effectiveness studies covered years from 2003 to March 2012 and included the      following data bases: MEDLINE, MEDLINE In-Process & Other Non-Indexed Citations,       EMBASE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR), Database of Abstracts of       Reviews of Effects (DARE), NHS Economic Evaluation Database (NHS EED), HTA      databases [NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (CRD)], Science Citation      Index and Conference Proceedings (Web of Science), UK Clinical Research Network      (UKCRN) Portfolio Database, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health      Literature (CINAHL), PsycINFO and National Library of Medicine (NLM) Gateway,      Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Current Controlled      Trials and ClinicalTrials.gov. Reference lists of relevant articles were checked,      and VAD manufacturers\ websites interrogated. For economic analyses we made use      of individual patient data (IPD) held in the UK Blood and Transplant Database      (BTDB). REVIEW METHODS: Systematic reviews of evidence on clinical effectiveness       and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation US Food and Drug      Administration (FDA) and/or Conformite Europeenne (CE) approved VADs.      Publications from the last 5 years with control groups, or case series with 50 or      more patients were included. Outcomes included survival, functional capacity      (e.g. change in New York Heart Association functional classification), quality of      life (QoL) and adverse events. Data from the BTDB were obtained. A discrete-time,      semi-Markov, multistate model was built. Deterministic and probabilistic methods       with multiple sensitivity analyses varying survival, utilities and cost inputs to      the model were used. Model outputs were incremental cost-effectiveness ratios      (ICERs), cost/quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) gained and cost/life-year      gained (LYG). The discount rate was 3.5\% and the time horizon varied over 3      years, 10 years and lifetime. RESULTS: Forty publications reported clinical      effectiveness of VADs and one study reported cost-effectiveness. We found no      high-quality comparative empirical studies of VADs as BTT compared with MM or as       ATT compared with BTT. Approximately 15-25\% of the patients receiving a device      had died by 12 months. Studies reported the following wide ranges for adverse      events: 4-27\% bleeding requiring transfusion; 1.5-40\% stroke; 3.3-48\% infection;       1-14\% device failure; 3-30\% HF; 11-32\% reoperation; and 3-53\% renal failure. QoL       and functional status were reported as improved in studies of two devices      [HeartMate II (HMII; Thoratec Inc., Pleasanton, CA, USA) and HeartWare (HW;      HeartWare Inc., Framingham, MA, USA)]. At 3 years, 10 years and lifetime, the      ICERs for VADs as BTT compared with MM were pound122,730, pound68,088 and      pound55,173 respectively. These values were stable to changes in survival of the       MM group. Both QoL and costs were reduced by VADs as ATT compared with VADs as      BTT giving ICERs in south-west quadrant of the cost effectiveness plain (cost      saving/QALY sacrificed) of pound353,467, pound31,685 and pound20,637 over the 3      years, 10 years and lifetime horizons respectively. Probabilistic analyses      yielded similar results for both research questions. LIMITATIONS: Conclusions      about the clinical effectiveness were limited by the lack of randomised      controlled trials (RCTs) comparing the effectiveness of different VADs for BTT or      comparing BTT with any alternative treatment and by the overlapping populations      in published studies. Although IPD from the BTDB was used to estimate the      cost-effectiveness of VADs compared with MM for BTT, the lack of randomisation of      populations limited the interpretation of this analysis. CONCLUSIONS: At 3 years,      10 years and lifetime the ICERs for VADs as BTT compared with MM are higher than       generally applied willingness-to-pay thresholds in the UK, but at a lifetime time      horizon they approximate threshold values used in end of life assessments. VADs      as ATT have a reduced cost but cause reduced QALYs relative to BTT. Future      research should direct attention towards two areas. First, how any future      evaluations of second- or third-generation VADs might be conducted. For ethical      reasons a RCT offering equal probability of HT for each group would not be      feasible; future studies should fully assess costs, long-term patient survival,      QoL, functional ability and adverse events, so that these may be incorporated      into economic evaluation agreement on outcomes measures across future studies.      Second, continuation of accurate data collection in the UK database to encompass       QoL data and comparative assessment of performance with other international      centres. FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology      Assessment programme.FAU - Sutcliffe, PAU  - Sutcliffe PAD  - Warwick Evidence, Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.FAU - Connock, MAU  - Connock MFAU - Pulikottil-Jacob, RAU  - Pulikottil-Jacob RFAU - Kandala, N-BAU  - Kandala NBFAU - Suri, GAU  - Suri GFAU - Gurung, TAU  - Gurung TFAU - Grove, AAU  - Grove AFAU - Shyangdan, DAU  - Shyangdan DFAU - Briscoe, SAU  - Briscoe SFAU - Maheswaran, HAU  - Maheswaran HFAU - Clarke, AAU  - Clarke ALA  - engPT  - Journal ArticlePT  - Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov\tPT  - ReviewPL  - EnglandTA  - Health Technol AssessJT  - Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)JID - 9706284RN  - 0 (Cardiotonic Agents)SB  - IMMH  - Age FactorsMH  - Cardiotonic Agents/economics/therapeutic useMH  - Cost-Benefit AnalysisMH  - Great BritainMH  - Heart Failure/*mortality/*therapyMH  - Heart-Assist Devices/adverse effects/*economicsMH  - HumansMH  - Models, EconomicMH  - Quality of LifeMH  - Quality-Adjusted Life YearsMH  - State MedicineMH  - Technology Assessment, BiomedicalEDAT- 2013/11/28 06:00MHDA- 2014/08/12 06:00CRDT- 2013/11/28 06:00AID - 10.3310/hta17530 [doi]PST - ppublishSO  - Health Technol Assess. 2013 Nov;17(53):1-499, v-vi. doi: 10.3310/hta17530.- 24280231own - nlmstat- medlineda  - 20131127dcom- 20140811is  - 2046-4924 (electronic)is  - 1366-5278 (linking)vi  - 17ip  - 53dp  - 2013 novti  - clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation      left ventricular assist devices as either bridge to transplant or alternative to       transplant for adults eligible for heart transplantation: systematic review and      cost-effectiveness model.pg  - 1-499, v-vilid - 10.3310/hta17530 [doi]ab  - background: advanced heart failure (hf) is a debilitating condition for which      heart transplant (ht) offers the best treatment option. however, the supply of      donor hearts is diminishing and demand greatly exceeds supply. ventricular assist      devices (vads) are surgically implanted pumps used as an alternative to      transplant (att) or as a bridge to transplant (btt) while a patient awaits a      donor heart. surgery and vads are costly. for the nhs to allocate and deliver      such services in a cost-effective way the relative costs and benefits of these      alternative treatments need to be estimated. objectives: to investigate for      patients aged >/= 16 years with advanced hf eligible for ht: (1) the clinical      effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation vads used as      btt compared with medical management (mm); and (2) the clinical effectiveness and      cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation vads used as an att in      comparison with their use as btt therapy. data sources: searches for clinical      effectiveness studies covered years from 2003 to march 2012 and included the      following data bases: medline, medline in-process & other non-indexed citations,       embase, cochrane database of systematic reviews (cdsr), database of abstracts of       reviews of effects (dare), nhs economic evaluation database (nhs eed), hta      databases [nhs centre for reviews and dissemination (crd)], science citation      index and conference proceedings (web of science), uk clinical research network      (ukcrn) portfolio database, cumulative index to nursing and allied health      literature (cinahl), psycinfo and national library of medicine (nlm) gateway,      cochrane central register of controlled trials (central), current controlled      trials and clinicaltrials.gov. reference lists of relevant articles were checked,      and vad manufacturers\ websites interrogated. for economic analyses we made use      of individual patient data (ipd) held in the uk blood and transplant database      (btdb). review methods: systematic reviews of evidence on clinical effectiveness       and cost-effectiveness of second- and third-generation us food and drug      administration (fda) and/or conformite europeenne (ce) approved vads.      publications from the last 5 years with control groups, or case series with 50 or      more patients were included. outcomes included survival, functional capacity      (e.g. change in new york heart association functional classification), quality of      life (qol) and adverse events. data from the btdb were obtained. a discrete-time,      semi-markov, multistate model was built. deterministic and probabilistic methods       with multiple sensitivity analyses varying survival, utilities and cost inputs to      the model were used. model outputs were incremental cost-effectiveness ratios      (icers), cost/quality-adjusted life-years (qalys) gained and cost/life-year      gained (lyg). the discount rate was 3.5\% and the time horizon varied over 3      years, 10 years and lifetime. results: forty publications reported clinical      effectiveness of vads and one study reported cost-effectiveness. we found no      high-quality comparative empirical studies of vads as btt compared with mm or as       att compared with btt. approximately 15-25\% of the patients receiving a device      had died by 12 months. studies reported the following wide ranges for adverse      events: 4-27\% bleeding requiring transfusion; 1.5-40\% stroke; 3.3-48\% infection;       1-14\% device failure; 3-30\% hf; 11-32\% reoperation; and 3-53\% renal failure. qol       and functional status were reported as improved in studies of two devices      [heartmate ii (hmii; thoratec inc., pleasanton, ca, usa) and heartware (hw;      heartware inc., framingham, ma, usa)]. at 3 years, 10 years and lifetime, the      icers for vads as btt compared with mm were pound122,730, pound68,088 and      pound55,173 respectively. these values were stable to changes in survival of the       mm group. both qol and costs were reduced by vads as att compared with vads as      btt giving icers in south-west quadrant of the cost effectiveness plain (cost      saving/qaly sacrificed) of pound353,467, pound31,685 and pound20,637 over the 3      years, 10 years and lifetime horizons respectively. probabilistic analyses      yielded similar results for both research questions. limitations: conclusions      about the clinical effectiveness were limited by the lack of randomised      controlled trials (rcts) comparing the effectiveness of different vads for btt or      comparing btt with any alternative treatment and by the overlapping populations      in published studies. although ipd from the btdb was used to estimate the      cost-effectiveness of vads compared with mm for btt, the lack of randomisation of      populations limited the interpretation of this analysis. conclusions: at 3 years,      10 years and lifetime the icers for vads as btt compared with mm are higher than       generally applied willingness-to-pay thresholds in the uk, but at a lifetime time      horizon they approximate threshold values used in end of life assessments. vads      as att have a reduced cost but cause reduced qalys relative to btt. future      research should direct attention towards two areas. first, how any future      evaluations of second- or third-generation vads might be conducted. for ethical      reasons a rct offering equal probability of ht for each group would not be      feasible; future studies should fully assess costs, long-term patient survival,      qol, functional ability and adverse events, so that these may be incorporated      into economic evaluation agreement on outcomes measures across future studies.      second, continuation of accurate data collection in the uk database to encompass       qol data and comparative assessment of performance with other international      centres. funding: the national institute for health research health technology      assessment programme.fau - sutcliffe, pau  - sutcliffe pad  - warwick evidence, warwick medical school, university of warwick, coventry, uk.fau - connock, mau  - connock mfau - pulikottil-jacob, rau  - pulikottil-jacob rfau - kandala, n-bau  - kandala nbfau - suri, gau  - suri gfau - gurung, tau  - gurung tfau - grove, aau  - grove afau - shyangdan, dau  - shyangdan dfau - briscoe, sau  - briscoe sfau - maheswaran, hau  - maheswaran hfau - clarke, aau  - clarke ala  - engpt  - journal articlept  - research support, non-u.s. gov\tpt  - reviewpl  - englandta  - health technol assessjt  - health technology assessment (winchester, england)jid - 9706284rn  - 0 (cardiotonic agents)sb  - immh  - age factorsmh  - cardiotonic agents/economics/therapeutic usemh  - cost-benefit analysismh  - great britainmh  - heart failure/*mortality/*therapymh  - heart-assist devices/adverse effects/*economicsmh  - humansmh  - models, economicmh  - quality of lifemh  - quality-adjusted life yearsmh  - state medicinemh  - technology assessment, biomedicaledat- 2013/11/28 06:00mhda- 2014/08/12 06:00crdt- 2013/11/28 06:00aid - 10.3310/hta17530 [doi]pst - ppublishso  - health technol assess. 2013 nov;17(53):1-499, v-vi. doi: 10.3310/hta17530.