
NURSING-NURSE.COM Your Online Health and Nursing Guide and Reference

Congestive Heart Failure - Definition

Heart failure occurs when the heart’s pumping becomes impaired, resulting in inability to meet the body’s oxygen demands.  The most common type of heart failure, left-sided failure, occurs when the left ventricle cannot contract sufficiently.
Afterload is the amount of resistance the ventricle pumps against.  In order to pump effectively, the ventricle must generate sufficient pressure to overcome this resistance.
Left heart failure occurs when arteries downstream constrict, resulting in increased afterload:  resistance too high for the ventricle to pump against.
A heart attack can also cause left heart failure.
In a failing heart, blood accumulates in the left ventricle causing pressure.  This pressure, called preload, causes the ventricle to expand.
Increased preload worsens the ventricle’s ability to pump. Accumulating blood stretches the cardiac muscle fibers, pulling myosin and actin filaments farther apart.  When over-stretched, myosin molecules cannot connect with actin, the myosin–actin crossbridges cannot swivel.
The inability of the crossbridges to swivel causes makes contraction weaker, reducing the likelihood that sufficient blood will be pumped.  The progression of heart failure continues as blood accumulates.
Built-up blood in the left ventricle causes a backup of blood throughout the pulmonary circuit, leading to pulmonary congestion.  This associated congestion is responsible for left heart failure, also known as “congestive heart failure.”
Blood build up in the lungs causes difficulty breathing, especially when a person is reclining.  Pulmonary congestion also reduces the ability to oxygenate the blood, worsening systemic hypoxia.
The progressive nature of congestive heart failure, if untreated, ultimately causes death.



« Safety And Infection ControlEye Disorders: Errors Of Refraction »

English
Spanish
CATEGORIES
Cancer / Oncology Nursing
Comprehensive Physical Assessment
Diseases
Communicable Diseases
Drug Study
Focus of NCLEX Exam
Health Care
Health Education
Human Body
Maternal and Child Nursing
Labor and Delivery
Postpartum Care
Pregnancy Related Problems
The Intrapartum Care
Medical and Nursing Management
Acid-Base Imbalances
Gastrointestinal Diseases
Heart Diseases
Hepatobiliary Diseases
Major Fluids and Electrolyte Imbalances
Renal Diseases
Respiratory Diseases
Sensory Diseases
Skin Diseases
Vascular Diseases
Medical Surgical Nursing
Nursing Ethics
Nursing Interventions
Nursing Skills / Procedures
Nursing Process
Pediatric Nursing
Psychiatric Nursing
Uncategorized
Vitamins and Minerals: Functions, Sources and Overdose


Privacy Policy

Copyright © 2007 Nursing-Nurse.Com. All rights reserved.
Searching for congestive heart? 