: 10475480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1841. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999 Aug;68(2):729-33.Permanent ventricular assist device support versus cardiac transplantation.Pennington DG(1), Oaks TE, Lohmann DP.Author information: (1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Wake Forest University School ofMedicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA. gpenning@wfubmc.eduBACKGROUND: Although cardiac transplantation provides excellent therapy for some patients with terminal heart failure, the results are limited by the scarcity of donor organs, reduced long-term survival, and comorbid conditions. Currentexperience with temporary left ventricular assist devices suggest that apermanent, totally, or near totally implantable device may be a viablealternative.METHODS: We analyzed data from the 1997 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) Registry and other literature on heart transplantationand compared survival and complication rates with our experience and that ofothers with temporary ventricular assist devices. From these data, we attemptedto identify those patients who would benefit most from permanent left ventricularassist systems (LVASs).RESULTS: Among heart transplant candidates, United Network for Organ Sharing(UNOS) status II, O blood type, weight >180 lb, older age, and preformedantibodies are negative factors for receipt of donor hearts. Of patientstransplanted, women and nonwhites have poorer outcomes. Success with wearableLVAS's suggest some of these patients might be better served with an LVAS thanwith cardiac transplantation.CONCLUSIONS: Because LVAS's could be made readily available without the need for a waiting list, they might compete well with the strategy of cardiactransplantation.: 10475480  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1841. ann thorac surg. 1999 aug;68(2):729-33.permanent ventricular assist device support versus cardiac transplantation.pennington dg(1), oaks te, lohmann dp.author information: (1)department of cardiothoracic surgery, wake forest university school ofmedicine, winston-salem, north carolina 27157, usa. gpenning@wfubmc.edubackground: although cardiac transplantation provides excellent therapy for some patients with terminal heart failure, the results are limited by the scarcity of donor organs, reduced long-term survival, and comorbid conditions. currentexperience with temporary left ventricular assist devices suggest that apermanent, totally, or near totally implantable device may be a viablealternative.methods: we analyzed data from the 1997 international society for heart and lung transplantation (ishlt) registry and other literature on heart transplantationand compared survival and complication rates with our experience and that ofothers with temporary ventricular assist devices. from these data, we attemptedto identify those patients who would benefit most from permanent left ventricularassist systems (lvass).results: among heart transplant candidates, united network for organ sharing(unos) status ii, o blood type, weight >180 lb, older age, and preformedantibodies are negative factors for receipt of donor hearts. of patientstransplanted, women and nonwhites have poorer outcomes. success with wearablelvas's suggest some of these patients might be better served with an lvas thanwith cardiac transplantation.conclusions: because lvas's could be made readily available without the need for a waiting list, they might compete well with the strategy of cardiactransplantation.