: 24372519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]293. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2014 Apr;18(4):499-510. doi:10.1093/icvts/ivt472. Epub 2013 Dec 25.Can the temporary use of right ventricular assist devices bridge patients withacute right ventricular failure after cardiac surgery to recovery?Lang SA(1), O'Neill B, Waterworth P, Bilal H.Author information: (1)School of Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.A best evidence topic in cardiac surgery was written according to a structuredprotocol. The question addressed was: Can the temporary use of right ventricular assist devices (RVADs) bridge patients to recovery who suffer acute rightventricular failure after cardiac surgery? More than 183 papers were found using the reported search, of which 13 represented the best evidence to answer theclinical question. The authors, journal, date and country of publication, patientgroup studied, study type, relevant outcomes and results of these papers aretabulated. Indications for surgical intervention included coronary artery bypass surgery, valve replacement, post-heart transplant and left ventricular assistdevice insertion. Significant reductions in central venous pressure (P = 0.005)and mean pulmonary artery pressures (P < 0.01) were reported during and afterRVAD support. Furthermore, increases in right ventricular cardiac output (P <0.05), right ventricular ejection fraction (P < 0.05), right ventricular strokework (P < 0.05) and pulmonary artery oxygen saturations (P < 0.05) were alsoseen. Assessment by one study showed that on Day 7 after RVAD removal, the right ventricular ejection fraction had increased by up to 40%. Dynamicechocardiography studies performed before, during and after RVAD placementdemonstrated that after RVAD implantation, right ventricular end-diastolicdimensions (P < 0.05) and right atrial dimensions decreased (P < 0.05) and right ventricular ejection fraction (P < 0.05) increased. Although several studiessuccessfully weaned patients from an RVAD, there were several complications,including bleeding requiring surgical intervention. However, this may be reduced by using percutaneous implantation (bleeding incidence: 4 of 9 patients) ratherthan by a surgically implanted RVAD (bleeding incidence: 5 of 5 patients).However, mortality is higher in percutaneous RVAD patients rather than insurgical RVAD (80-44%) patients. Causes of death cited for patients on an RVADincluded multiorgan failure, sepsis, thromboembolic events, reoccurring rightheart failure and failure to wean due to persistent right ventricular failure. Weconclude that RVADs have been successfully used to bridge patients to recoveryafter cardiac surgery; however, RVADs carry numerous risks and a high mortalityrate.PMCID: PMC3957279: 24372519  [pubmed - indexed for medline]293. interact cardiovasc thorac surg. 2014 apr;18(4):499-510. doi:10.1093/icvts/ivt472. epub 2013 dec 25.can the temporary use of right ventricular assist devices bridge patients withacute right ventricular failure after cardiac surgery to recovery?lang sa(1), o'neill b, waterworth p, bilal h.author information: (1)school of medicine, university of manchester, manchester, uk.a best evidence topic in cardiac surgery was written according to a structuredprotocol. the question addressed was: can the temporary use of right ventricular assist devices (rvads) bridge patients to recovery who suffer acute rightventricular failure after cardiac surgery? more than 183 papers were found using the reported search, of which 13 represented the best evidence to answer theclinical question. the authors, journal, date and country of publication, patientgroup studied, study type, relevant outcomes and results of these papers aretabulated. indications for surgical intervention included coronary artery bypass surgery, valve replacement, post-heart transplant and left ventricular assistdevice insertion. significant reductions in central venous pressure (p = 0.005)and mean pulmonary artery pressures (p < 0.01) were reported during and afterrvad support. furthermore, increases in right ventricular cardiac output (p <0.05), right ventricular ejection fraction (p < 0.05), right ventricular strokework (p < 0.05) and pulmonary artery oxygen saturations (p < 0.05) were alsoseen. assessment by one study showed that on day 7 after rvad removal, the right ventricular ejection fraction had increased by up to 40%. dynamicechocardiography studies performed before, during and after rvad placementdemonstrated that after rvad implantation, right ventricular end-diastolicdimensions (p < 0.05) and right atrial dimensions decreased (p < 0.05) and right ventricular ejection fraction (p < 0.05) increased. although several studiessuccessfully weaned patients from an rvad, there were several complications,including bleeding requiring surgical intervention. however, this may be reduced by using percutaneous implantation (bleeding incidence: 4 of 9 patients) ratherthan by a surgically implanted rvad (bleeding incidence: 5 of 5 patients).however, mortality is higher in percutaneous rvad patients rather than insurgical rvad (80-44%) patients. causes of death cited for patients on an rvadincluded multiorgan failure, sepsis, thromboembolic events, reoccurring rightheart failure and failure to wean due to persistent right ventricular failure. weconclude that rvads have been successfully used to bridge patients to recoveryafter cardiac surgery; however, rvads carry numerous risks and a high mortalityrate.pmcid: pmc3957279