: 24336784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]308. ASAIO J. 2014 Jan-Feb;60(1):134-6. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0000000000000028.Left ventricular assist device pump thrombosis: is there a role for glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors?Bellumkonda L(1), Subrahmanyan L, Jacoby D, Bonde P.Author information: (1)From the *Division of Cardiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,Connecticut; and †Section of Cardiac Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,Connecticut.Left ventricular assist devices (LVADs) fill a critical need by providingcirculatory support to patients with end-stage heart failure who are eitherineligible for heart transplant or too ill to stably wait for an eventual donororgan. Furthermore, they are critical to the arsenal of the heart failurecardiologist, given the supply/demand mismatch for donor organs. Unfortunately,these devices present their own complications. Despite antiplatelet agents andsystemic anticoagulation, a number of patients present with pump thrombosis, alife-threatening event requiring either pump exchange or treatment with systemic thrombolytics. In an effort to avoid these morbid therapies, glycogen IIb/IIIainhibitors, which have both antiplatelet and thrombolytic properties, have beenproposed to treat pump thrombosis. We report here the largest case series usingthese agents and document a previously unreported high failure rate with thistherapy.: 24336784  [pubmed - indexed for medline]308. asaio j. 2014 jan-feb;60(1):134-6. doi: 10.1097/mat.0000000000000028.left ventricular assist device pump thrombosis: is there a role for glycoprotein iib/iiia inhibitors?bellumkonda l(1), subrahmanyan l, jacoby d, bonde p.author information: (1)from the *division of cardiology, yale school of medicine, new haven,connecticut; and †section of cardiac surgery, yale school of medicine, new haven,connecticut.left ventricular assist devices (lvads) fill a critical need by providingcirculatory support to patients with end-stage heart failure who are eitherineligible for heart transplant or too ill to stably wait for an eventual donororgan. furthermore, they are critical to the arsenal of the heart failurecardiologist, given the supply/demand mismatch for donor organs. unfortunately,these devices present their own complications. despite antiplatelet agents andsystemic anticoagulation, a number of patients present with pump thrombosis, alife-threatening event requiring either pump exchange or treatment with systemic thrombolytics. in an effort to avoid these morbid therapies, glycogen iib/iiiainhibitors, which have both antiplatelet and thrombolytic properties, have beenproposed to treat pump thrombosis. we report here the largest case series usingthese agents and document a previously unreported high failure rate with thistherapy.