: 23641013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]446. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2013 Sep;32(9):873-80. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2013.03.015. Epub 2013 Apr 28.Is it time for a cardiac allocation score? First results from the Eurotransplant pilot study on a survival benefit-based heart allocation.Smits JM(1), de Vries E, De Pauw M, Zuckermann A, Rahmel A, Meiser B, Laufer G,Reichenspurner H, Strueber M.Author information: (1)Eurotransplant International Foundation Leiden, The Netherlands.jsmits@eurotransplant.orgBACKGROUND: Patients awaiting heart transplantation in Eurotransplant areprioritized by waiting time and medical urgency. To reduce mortality, theintroduction of post-transplant survival in an allocation model based on theconcept of survival benefit might be more appropriate. The aim of this study was to assess the prognostic accuracy of the heart failure survival score (HFSS), theSeattle heart failure model (SHFM), the Interagency Registry for MechanicallyAssisted Circulatory Support (INTERMACS) model, and the index for mortalityprediction after cardiac transplantation (IMPACT) score for predicting mortality.METHODS: The HFSS, SHFM, the adapted SHFM, and the INTERMACS model were evaluatedfor predicting waiting list mortality among heart transplant candidates, and the IMPACT score was tested for predicting post-transplant mortality in separate Cox regression models. Included were the 448 adult heart transplant candidates listedfor an urgent status between October 2010 and June 2011 in Eurotransplant. Acardiac allocation score (CAS) was calculated based on the estimated survivaltimes as predicted by the scores. All analyses were performed for the totalcohort and separately for ventricular assist device (VAD) and non-VAD patients.RESULTS: Mortality on the waiting list could significantly be predicted in thenon-VAD cohort by HFSS (p = 0.005) and SHFM (p < 0.0001) and after transplant by IMPACT (p < 0.0001). None of the tested scores could predict mortality amongVAD-supported patients.CONCLUSIONS: In non-VAD patients, the HFSS, SHFM, and IMPACT provide accuraterisk stratification. Further studies will reveal whether these models should beconsidered as the basis for a new heart allocation policy in Eurotransplant.Copyright Â© 2013 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.: 23641013  [pubmed - indexed for medline]446. j heart lung transplant. 2013 sep;32(9):873-80. doi:10.1016/j.healun.2013.03.015. epub 2013 apr 28.is it time for a cardiac allocation score? first results from the eurotransplant pilot study on a survival benefit-based heart allocation.smits jm(1), de vries e, de pauw m, zuckermann a, rahmel a, meiser b, laufer g,reichenspurner h, strueber m.author information: (1)eurotransplant international foundation leiden, the netherlands.jsmits@eurotransplant.orgbackground: patients awaiting heart transplantation in eurotransplant areprioritized by waiting time and medical urgency. to reduce mortality, theintroduction of post-transplant survival in an allocation model based on theconcept of survival benefit might be more appropriate. the aim of this study was to assess the prognostic accuracy of the heart failure survival score (hfss), theseattle heart failure model (shfm), the interagency registry for mechanicallyassisted circulatory support (intermacs) model, and the index for mortalityprediction after cardiac transplantation (impact) score for predicting mortality.methods: the hfss, shfm, the adapted shfm, and the intermacs model were evaluatedfor predicting waiting list mortality among heart transplant candidates, and the impact score was tested for predicting post-transplant mortality in separate cox regression models. included were the 448 adult heart transplant candidates listedfor an urgent status between october 2010 and june 2011 in eurotransplant. acardiac allocation score (cas) was calculated based on the estimated survivaltimes as predicted by the scores. all analyses were performed for the totalcohort and separately for ventricular assist device (vad) and non-vad patients.results: mortality on the waiting list could significantly be predicted in thenon-vad cohort by hfss (p = 0.005) and shfm (p < 0.0001) and after transplant by impact (p < 0.0001). none of the tested scores could predict mortality amongvad-supported patients.conclusions: in non-vad patients, the hfss, shfm, and impact provide accuraterisk stratification. further studies will reveal whether these models should beconsidered as the basis for a new heart allocation policy in eurotransplant.copyright â© 2013 international society for heart and lung transplantation.published by elsevier inc. all rights reserved.