: 20436356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]965. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2010 Jun;15(2):102-11. doi:10.1177/1074248410366447.Review article: the new concept of interventional heart failure therapy--part 1: electrical therapy, treatment of CAD, fluid removal, and ventricular support.Thompson KA(1), Philip KJ, Barbagelata A, Schwarz ER.Author information: (1)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Cedars Sinai Heart Institute, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.Congestive heart failure is a chronic and debilitating disease responsible forhigh cardiac morbidity and mortality in the world and is associated with morethan 290 000 deaths in the United States each year. Recent advances in heartfailure therapy target many of the mechanical and structural aspects of heartfailure that are not addressed by drug-based therapies; these includeabnormalities in electrical conduction, coronary artery or valvular architecture,and in ventricular size and shape. To target these abnormalities, newer therapieshave largely been mechanical and device-based in nature and can be collectivelydescribed as interventional therapy. Interventional therapy includes the use ofinterventional medical therapy, electrical-based devices to augment ventricularfunction, catheterization-based devices for the treatment of underlying coronary artery disease and valvular disease, machines for the removal of excess fluid,mechanical pumps to assist the ventricles, surgical techniques aimed at reshapingthe ventricles, the use of tissue therapies such as stem cell transplantation or complete heart transplant, palliative care, and self-care. This article is thefirst in a 2-part series that will review interventional heart failure therapyand present the most recent data supporting its use.: 20436356  [pubmed - indexed for medline]965. j cardiovasc pharmacol ther. 2010 jun;15(2):102-11. doi:10.1177/1074248410366447.review article: the new concept of interventional heart failure therapy--part 1: electrical therapy, treatment of cad, fluid removal, and ventricular support.thompson ka(1), philip kj, barbagelata a, schwarz er.author information: (1)department of medicine, division of cardiology, cedars sinai heart institute, cedars sinai medical center, los angeles, ca, usa.congestive heart failure is a chronic and debilitating disease responsible forhigh cardiac morbidity and mortality in the world and is associated with morethan 290 000 deaths in the united states each year. recent advances in heartfailure therapy target many of the mechanical and structural aspects of heartfailure that are not addressed by drug-based therapies; these includeabnormalities in electrical conduction, coronary artery or valvular architecture,and in ventricular size and shape. to target these abnormalities, newer therapieshave largely been mechanical and device-based in nature and can be collectivelydescribed as interventional therapy. interventional therapy includes the use ofinterventional medical therapy, electrical-based devices to augment ventricularfunction, catheterization-based devices for the treatment of underlying coronary artery disease and valvular disease, machines for the removal of excess fluid,mechanical pumps to assist the ventricles, surgical techniques aimed at reshapingthe ventricles, the use of tissue therapies such as stem cell transplantation or complete heart transplant, palliative care, and self-care. this article is thefirst in a 2-part series that will review interventional heart failure therapyand present the most recent data supporting its use.