: 10709830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]1824. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2000 Feb;19(2):121-6.Implantable left ventricular assist devices can successfully bridge adolescentpatients to transplant.Helman DN(1), Addonizio LJ, Morales DL, Catanese KA, Flannery MA, Quagebeur JM,Edwards NM, Galantowicz ME, Oz MC.Author information: (1)Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center,Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 10032,USA.BACKGROUND: Left ventricular assist devices (LVAD) have been used successfully asa life-sustaining bridge to transplantation in adults with end-stage heartfailure. Long-term implantable cardiac assist devices for smaller adolescentpatients are not yet available in the United States.METHODS: This study reviews the experience with patients less than 21 years oldthat received HeartMate LVADs (TCI) at our institution. Twelve patients wereimplanted with 13 LVADs. The patients ranged in age from 11 to 20 years (mean 16 years). Body surface area ranged from 1.4 to 2.2 m2 (mean 1.8 m2). Patients were selected for LVAD placement based on eligibility for heart transplant andevidence of end-organ dysfunction. Device placement in small patients wasfacilitated with prosthetic graft abdominal wall closure. No patient receivedsystemic anticoagulation.RESULTS: The duration of LVAD support ranged from 0 to 397 days (mean 123 days). Seven of the 8 patients eligible for discharge from the hospital with avented-electric LVAD were supported at home while awaiting transplantation.Outcomes of LVAD support were: LVAD explantation in 2 cases (15%), expirationwith LVAD in place in 3 cases (23%), and successful transplantation in 8 cases(62%). Complications included 4 patients with systemic infection, 3 re-operationsfor hemorrhage, 1 embolic event, and 1 intraoperative air embolus that provedfatal. One explanted patient required a subsequent LVAD and the other expired 4months after explantation. Six of the 8 transplanted patients are alive and well with follow-up ranging from 8 to 43 months.CONCLUSIONS: Adolescent patients with heart failure can be successfully supportedon a long-term basis to heart transplantation with the HeartMate LVAD. Thewearable device allows for discharge home while awaiting transplantation. Device explantation without subsequent transplantation can be unpredictable. Theincidence of thromboembolism remains low despite the absence of systemicanticoagulation. The technique of prosthetic graft closure of the abdominal wall facilitates the use of this device in smaller patients.: 10709830  [pubmed - indexed for medline]1824. j heart lung transplant. 2000 feb;19(2):121-6.implantable left ventricular assist devices can successfully bridge adolescentpatients to transplant.helman dn(1), addonizio lj, morales dl, catanese ka, flannery ma, quagebeur jm,edwards nm, galantowicz me, oz mc.author information: (1)division of cardiothoracic surgery, columbia-presbyterian medical center,columbia university college of physicians and surgeons, new york, new york 10032,usa.background: left ventricular assist devices (lvad) have been used successfully asa life-sustaining bridge to transplantation in adults with end-stage heartfailure. long-term implantable cardiac assist devices for smaller adolescentpatients are not yet available in the united states.methods: this study reviews the experience with patients less than 21 years oldthat received heartmate lvads (tci) at our institution. twelve patients wereimplanted with 13 lvads. the patients ranged in age from 11 to 20 years (mean 16 years). body surface area ranged from 1.4 to 2.2 m2 (mean 1.8 m2). patients were selected for lvad placement based on eligibility for heart transplant andevidence of end-organ dysfunction. device placement in small patients wasfacilitated with prosthetic graft abdominal wall closure. no patient receivedsystemic anticoagulation.results: the duration of lvad support ranged from 0 to 397 days (mean 123 days). seven of the 8 patients eligible for discharge from the hospital with avented-electric lvad were supported at home while awaiting transplantation.outcomes of lvad support were: lvad explantation in 2 cases (15%), expirationwith lvad in place in 3 cases (23%), and successful transplantation in 8 cases(62%). complications included 4 patients with systemic infection, 3 re-operationsfor hemorrhage, 1 embolic event, and 1 intraoperative air embolus that provedfatal. one explanted patient required a subsequent lvad and the other expired 4months after explantation. six of the 8 transplanted patients are alive and well with follow-up ranging from 8 to 43 months.conclusions: adolescent patients with heart failure can be successfully supportedon a long-term basis to heart transplantation with the heartmate lvad. thewearable device allows for discharge home while awaiting transplantation. device explantation without subsequent transplantation can be unpredictable. theincidence of thromboembolism remains low despite the absence of systemicanticoagulation. the technique of prosthetic graft closure of the abdominal wall facilitates the use of this device in smaller patients.