: 22910082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]581. Can J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2012 Summer;22(3):18-23.The development and evaluation of a competency-based program for patients with a ventricular assist device.Loughran S(1), Kealy J, Shook A, Kaan A.Author information: (1)St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC. sloughran@providencehealth.bc.caThe ventricular assist device (VAD) is a mechanical device that is used toprovide long term support either as a bridge or as an alternative totransplantation for patients suffering from end stage heart failure. While inhospital, patients with a VAD have traditionally been taught by an educator nursewith VAD expertise in preparation for discharge. In 2004, our centre implemented a successful competency-based patient education program in post-heart transplant patients and thought that a similar program may provide increased confidence for bedside nurses to actively participate in VAD patient education prior todischarge. The purpose of this quality improvement project was to create acompetency-based education program that would provide consistency in patientteaching. A questionnaire was developed and completed by 13 bedside nurses. This pre-test questionnaire indicated the need for a systematic and organized approachto VAD patient teaching. Furthermore, adequate resources, consistency in teachingmethods, and feedback were seen to be essential. A pilot competency-based programwas designed to lead bedside nurses and patients through a series of learningphases and has successfully been implemented. Since its implementation, thequestionnaire has been repeated with results reflecting satisfaction with therevised competency-based program. Our findings and evaluation of the programthrough pre- and post-testing reflect an increase in organization in our teachingmethods and has led to improved confidence and satisfaction for bedside nursesusing this program. By redeveloping the current method of VAD education, our goalhas been to improve the ways in which we deliver teaching to our patients. It is thought that, as with our experience in the post-heart transplant population,bedside nurses and team members will feel more empowered to provide teaching topatients with a VAD.: 22910082  [pubmed - indexed for medline]581. can j cardiovasc nurs. 2012 summer;22(3):18-23.the development and evaluation of a competency-based program for patients with a ventricular assist device.loughran s(1), kealy j, shook a, kaan a.author information: (1)st. paul's hospital, vancouver, bc. sloughran@providencehealth.bc.cathe ventricular assist device (vad) is a mechanical device that is used toprovide long term support either as a bridge or as an alternative totransplantation for patients suffering from end stage heart failure. while inhospital, patients with a vad have traditionally been taught by an educator nursewith vad expertise in preparation for discharge. in 2004, our centre implemented a successful competency-based patient education program in post-heart transplant patients and thought that a similar program may provide increased confidence for bedside nurses to actively participate in vad patient education prior todischarge. the purpose of this quality improvement project was to create acompetency-based education program that would provide consistency in patientteaching. a questionnaire was developed and completed by 13 bedside nurses. this pre-test questionnaire indicated the need for a systematic and organized approachto vad patient teaching. furthermore, adequate resources, consistency in teachingmethods, and feedback were seen to be essential. a pilot competency-based programwas designed to lead bedside nurses and patients through a series of learningphases and has successfully been implemented. since its implementation, thequestionnaire has been repeated with results reflecting satisfaction with therevised competency-based program. our findings and evaluation of the programthrough pre- and post-testing reflect an increase in organization in our teachingmethods and has led to improved confidence and satisfaction for bedside nursesusing this program. by redeveloping the current method of vad education, our goalhas been to improve the ways in which we deliver teaching to our patients. it is thought that, as with our experience in the post-heart transplant population,bedside nurses and team members will feel more empowered to provide teaching topatients with a vad.