: 21092045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]884. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2011 Feb;24(1):86-91. doi: 10.1097/ACO.0b013e328340ff64.Surgical approach to end-stage heart failure.Klotz S(1), Scheld HH.Author information: (1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University HospitalMuenster, Muenster, Germany. stefan.klotz@ukmuenster.dePURPOSE OF REVIEW: End-stage heart failure is a challenging disease with growing incidence. With decreasing heart transplant rates worldwide organ preservingtherapies become, again, of interest. The purpose of the present review is toexamine the potential challenges of surgical therapies in patients with end-stageheart failure.RECENT FINDINGS: The gold-standard for end-stage heart failure is and will becardiac transplantation. However, due to organ shortage this therapy is limitedto a few patients. Therefore implantation of ventricular assist devices (VADs) orlong-term minimal-invasive partial support devices will increase. Improvements indevice design with smaller devices, easier implantation techniques, and modified anticoagulation outcome and long-term success will likely improve. In addition,good quality of life as destination therapy is almost available. Organconservation surgery (coronary artery bypass grafting and surgical ventricularrestoration or surgical repair of mitral valve regurgitation) in end-stage heart failure patients could not prove the expected results. Transcatheter orminimal-invasive approaches of these therapies might become routine in the nearfuture.SUMMARY: Due to the overwhelming outcome rates, cardiac transplantation is themost established surgical therapy for end-stage heart failure. VAD therapy isincreasing and minimized VADs might further open the market for destinationtherapy/permanent support.: 21092045  [pubmed - indexed for medline]884. curr opin anaesthesiol. 2011 feb;24(1):86-91. doi: 10.1097/aco.0b013e328340ff64.surgical approach to end-stage heart failure.klotz s(1), scheld hh.author information: (1)department of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery, university hospitalmuenster, muenster, germany. stefan.klotz@ukmuenster.depurpose of review: end-stage heart failure is a challenging disease with growing incidence. with decreasing heart transplant rates worldwide organ preservingtherapies become, again, of interest. the purpose of the present review is toexamine the potential challenges of surgical therapies in patients with end-stageheart failure.recent findings: the gold-standard for end-stage heart failure is and will becardiac transplantation. however, due to organ shortage this therapy is limitedto a few patients. therefore implantation of ventricular assist devices (vads) orlong-term minimal-invasive partial support devices will increase. improvements indevice design with smaller devices, easier implantation techniques, and modified anticoagulation outcome and long-term success will likely improve. in addition,good quality of life as destination therapy is almost available. organconservation surgery (coronary artery bypass grafting and surgical ventricularrestoration or surgical repair of mitral valve regurgitation) in end-stage heart failure patients could not prove the expected results. transcatheter orminimal-invasive approaches of these therapies might become routine in the nearfuture.summary: due to the overwhelming outcome rates, cardiac transplantation is themost established surgical therapy for end-stage heart failure. vad therapy isincreasing and minimized vads might further open the market for destinationtherapy/permanent support.