: 25759442  [PubMed - in process]35. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 May;99(5):1713-8. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.12.068.Epub 2015 Mar 6.Risk factors for prolonged mechanical ventilation for children on ventricularassist device support.Prodhan P(1), Kalikivenkata G(2), Tang X(3), Thomas K(4), Byrnes J(5), ImamuraM(6), Jaquiss RD(7), Garcia X(8), Frazier EA(4), Bhutta AT(9), DyamenahalliU(10).Author information: (1)Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, College ofMedicine, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children Hospital,Little Rock, Arkansas; Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department ofPediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences,Arkansas Children Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas. Electronic address:prodhanparthak@uams.edu. (2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department ofPediatrics, University of Florida Hospitals, Gainesville, Florida. (3)Division ofBiostatistics, Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University ofArkansas Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas.(4)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, College ofMedicine, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children Hospital,Little Rock, Arkansas. (5)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department ofPediatrics, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio. (6)Division ofCardiovascular Surgery, Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Universityof Arkansas Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas. (7)Division of Pediatric Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, DukeMedical Center, Durham, North Carolina. (8)Division of Pediatric Critical Care,Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Arkansas MedicalSciences, Arkansas Children Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas; Division ofPediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Universityof Arkansas Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas. (9)Division of Pediatric Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, University ofMaryland, Baltimore, Maryland. (10)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Departmentof Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences,Arkansas Children Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas; Division of PediatricCardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.BACKGROUND: Patients with end-stage heart failure possess many attributes thatplace them at risk for prolonged mechanical ventilation (MV). However, there are only limited data on MV support among children after ventricular assist device(VAD) implantation. We report the duration of MV after VAD placement, indicationsfor respiratory support in the postimplantation period, and associated patientfactors.METHODS: This single-center retrospective study included 43 consecutive children (aged <18 years) with end-stage heart failure who were supported with a VAD as a bridge to transplantation from January 2005 to December 2011. Multivariableanalysis was performed using the multiple Poisson regression model for theduration of MV.RESULTS: Overall, 33% (nÂ = 14) remained on MV until heart transplant or death. Ofthose requiring pre-VAD extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support, 63%(nÂ = 12 of 19) remained on MV until heart transplant or death compared with 8%(nÂ = 2 of 24) among those not on ECMO before VAD (p < 0.001). Patients withmoderate or severe mitral regurgitation while on VAD support had 1.7-times moreMV days compared with those with none or trivial on-VAD mitral regurgitation. In addition, previous support on ECMO, those with moderate or severe tricuspidregurgitation, and those with only left VAD implants had an increased risk ofprolonged MV.CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that VAD recipients previously supported onECMO, those with moderate or severe mitral regurgitation, moderate or severetricuspid regurgitation, and those with only left VAD implants had an increasedrisk of prolonged MV. Future studies in larger cohorts are necessary to confirmthe findings from this single-institutional experience.Copyright Â© 2015 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. Allrights reserved.: 25759442  [pubmed - in process]35. ann thorac surg. 2015 may;99(5):1713-8. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.12.068.epub 2015 mar 6.risk factors for prolonged mechanical ventilation for children on ventricularassist device support.prodhan p(1), kalikivenkata g(2), tang x(3), thomas k(4), byrnes j(5), imamuram(6), jaquiss rd(7), garcia x(8), frazier ea(4), bhutta at(9), dyamenahalliu(10).author information: (1)division of pediatric critical care, department of pediatrics, college ofmedicine, university of arkansas medical sciences, arkansas children hospital,little rock, arkansas; division of pediatric cardiology, department ofpediatrics, college of medicine, university of arkansas medical sciences,arkansas children hospital, little rock, arkansas. electronic address:prodhanparthak@uams.edu. (2)division of pediatric cardiology, department ofpediatrics, university of florida hospitals, gainesville, florida. (3)division ofbiostatistics, department of pediatrics, college of medicine, university ofarkansas medical sciences, arkansas children hospital, little rock, arkansas.(4)division of pediatric cardiology, department of pediatrics, college ofmedicine, university of arkansas medical sciences, arkansas children hospital,little rock, arkansas. (5)division of pediatric cardiology, department ofpediatrics, cincinnati childrens hospital, cincinnati, ohio. (6)division ofcardiovascular surgery, department of pediatrics, college of medicine, universityof arkansas medical sciences, arkansas children hospital, little rock, arkansas. (7)division of pediatric cardiothoracic surgery, department of surgery, dukemedical center, durham, north carolina. (8)division of pediatric critical care,department of pediatrics, college of medicine, university of arkansas medicalsciences, arkansas children hospital, little rock, arkansas; division ofpediatric cardiology, department of pediatrics, college of medicine, universityof arkansas medical sciences, arkansas children hospital, little rock, arkansas. (9)division of pediatric critical care, department of pediatrics, university ofmaryland, baltimore, maryland. (10)division of pediatric cardiology, departmentof pediatrics, college of medicine, university of arkansas medical sciences,arkansas children hospital, little rock, arkansas; division of pediatriccardiology, department of pediatrics, university of chicago, chicago, illinois.background: patients with end-stage heart failure possess many attributes thatplace them at risk for prolonged mechanical ventilation (mv). however, there are only limited data on mv support among children after ventricular assist device(vad) implantation. we report the duration of mv after vad placement, indicationsfor respiratory support in the postimplantation period, and associated patientfactors.methods: this single-center retrospective study included 43 consecutive children (aged <18 years) with end-stage heart failure who were supported with a vad as a bridge to transplantation from january 2005 to december 2011. multivariableanalysis was performed using the multiple poisson regression model for theduration of mv.results: overall, 33% (nâ = 14) remained on mv until heart transplant or death. ofthose requiring pre-vad extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) support, 63%(nâ = 12 of 19) remained on mv until heart transplant or death compared with 8%(nâ = 2 of 24) among those not on ecmo before vad (p < 0.001). patients withmoderate or severe mitral regurgitation while on vad support had 1.7-times moremv days compared with those with none or trivial on-vad mitral regurgitation. in addition, previous support on ecmo, those with moderate or severe tricuspidregurgitation, and those with only left vad implants had an increased risk ofprolonged mv.conclusions: our results suggest that vad recipients previously supported onecmo, those with moderate or severe mitral regurgitation, moderate or severetricuspid regurgitation, and those with only left vad implants had an increasedrisk of prolonged mv. future studies in larger cohorts are necessary to confirmthe findings from this single-institutional experience.copyright â© 2015 the society of thoracic surgeons. published by elsevier inc. allrights reserved.