: 25048655  [PubMed - in process]142. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2014 Aug;118(2):194-201. doi:10.1016/j.oooo.2014.04.010. Epub 2014 May 6.Dental treatment in the cardiothoracic intensive care unit for patients withventricular assist devices awaiting heart transplant: a case series.Sung EC(1), Brar LK(2), Chung E(3), Kubak B(4), Carlson M(5), Deng M(6),Friedlander AH(7).Author information: (1)Professor of Clinical Dentistry and Vice Chair, Division of AdvancedProsthodontics; Director of the General Practice Residency/Hospital DentistryProgram, School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.Electronic address: esung@dentistry.ucla.edu. (2)Student, School of Dentistry,University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Clinical Associate Professor, Division of Advanced Prosthodontics; Clinical Director, General PracticeResidency/Hospital Dentistry Program, School of Dentistry, University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (4)Professor of Clinical Medicine, David GeffenSchool of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (5)Associate Clinical Professor, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine,University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (6)Professor of Medicine;Director of the Advanced Heart Failure/Mechanical Support/Heart TransplantProgram, Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School ofMedicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (7)Associate Chief ofStaff and Director of Graduate Medical Education, Veterans Affairs Greater LosAngeles Healthcare System; Director of Quality Assurance, Hospital DentalService, UCLA Medical Center; Professor of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Schoolof Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.OBJECTIVE: This report aims to describe the dental protocol for treating in theintensive care unit patients with end-stage heart failure who have hadventricular assist devices (VADs) emergently implanted as a bridge to hearttransplant. This protocol permitted the rendering of safe and effective dentalcare in this setting and did not result in near-term (1-30 days) excessivehemorrhage, local and systemic infection, or contamination of the VAD.STUDY DESIGN: This descriptive cross-sectional study by the University ofCalifornia, Los Angeles, Hospital Dental Service examined the dental care of 9patients (mean age, 50 Â± 12.9 years) with class IV stage D heart failure.RESULTS: Nine patients, 22 days (mean) after VAD placement, received dentaltreatment after intravenous prophylactic antibiotics and maintenance of prioranticoagulation, antiplatelet, or antithrombin regimen. Eight patients hadextractions (mean, 4; range, 1-12), and one of them also required scaling androot planing (SRP) of the remaining teeth. A ninth individual only required SRPof 4 quadrants. No adverse outcomes developed.CONCLUSIONS: Emergent removal of active dental disease in patients with VADawaiting heart transplant can be safely accomplished using established protocols with extended vigilance.Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.: 25048655  [pubmed - in process]142. oral surg oral med oral pathol oral radiol. 2014 aug;118(2):194-201. doi:10.1016/j.oooo.2014.04.010. epub 2014 may 6.dental treatment in the cardiothoracic intensive care unit for patients withventricular assist devices awaiting heart transplant: a case series.sung ec(1), brar lk(2), chung e(3), kubak b(4), carlson m(5), deng m(6),friedlander ah(7).author information: (1)professor of clinical dentistry and vice chair, division of advancedprosthodontics; director of the general practice residency/hospital dentistryprogram, school of dentistry, university of california, los angeles, ca, usa.electronic address: esung@dentistry.ucla.edu. (2)student, school of dentistry,university of california, los angeles, ca, usa. (3)clinical associate professor, division of advanced prosthodontics; clinical director, general practiceresidency/hospital dentistry program, school of dentistry, university ofcalifornia, los angeles, ca, usa. (4)professor of clinical medicine, david geffenschool of medicine, university of california, los angeles, ca, usa. (5)associate clinical professor, department of medicine, david geffen school of medicine,university of california, los angeles, ca, usa. (6)professor of medicine;director of the advanced heart failure/mechanical support/heart transplantprogram, division of cardiology, department of medicine, david geffen school ofmedicine, university of california, los angeles, ca, usa. (7)associate chief ofstaff and director of graduate medical education, veterans affairs greater losangeles healthcare system; director of quality assurance, hospital dentalservice, ucla medical center; professor of oral and maxillofacial surgery, schoolof dentistry, university of california, los angeles, ca, usa.objective: this report aims to describe the dental protocol for treating in theintensive care unit patients with end-stage heart failure who have hadventricular assist devices (vads) emergently implanted as a bridge to hearttransplant. this protocol permitted the rendering of safe and effective dentalcare in this setting and did not result in near-term (1-30 days) excessivehemorrhage, local and systemic infection, or contamination of the vad.study design: this descriptive cross-sectional study by the university ofcalifornia, los angeles, hospital dental service examined the dental care of 9patients (mean age, 50 â± 12.9 years) with class iv stage d heart failure.results: nine patients, 22 days (mean) after vad placement, received dentaltreatment after intravenous prophylactic antibiotics and maintenance of prioranticoagulation, antiplatelet, or antithrombin regimen. eight patients hadextractions (mean, 4; range, 1-12), and one of them also required scaling androot planing (srp) of the remaining teeth. a ninth individual only required srpof 4 quadrants. no adverse outcomes developed.conclusions: emergent removal of active dental disease in patients with vadawaiting heart transplant can be safely accomplished using established protocols with extended vigilance.copyright â© 2014 elsevier inc. all rights reserved.